2.10 O descendant of Bharata, to him who was 
sorrowing between the two armies, Hrsikesa, 
mocking as it were, said these words: 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda
2.10 And here, the text commencing from 'But 
seeing the army of the Pandavas' (1.2) and ending 
with '(he) verily became silent, telling Him 
(Govinda), "I shall not fight"' is to be explained as 
revealing the cause of the origin of the defect in the 
from of sorrow, delusion, etc. [Delusion means 
want of discrimination. Etc. stands for the 
secondary manifestations of sorrow and delusion, 
as also ignorance which is the root cause of all 
these.] which are the sources of the cycles of births 
and deaths of creatures. Thus indeed, Ajuna's own 
sorrow and delusion, cuased by the ideas of 
affection, parting, etc., originating from the 
erroneous belief, 'I belong to these; they belong to 
me', with regard to kingdom [See note under verse 
8.-Tr.], elders, sons, comrades, well-wishers (1.26), 
kinsmen (1.37), relatives (1.34) and friends, have 
been shown by him with the words, 'How can I 
(fight)...in battle (against) Bhisma' (4), etc. It is 
verily because his discriminating insight was 
overwhelmed by sorrow and delusion that, even 
though he had become engaged in battle out of his 
own accord as a duty of the Ksatriyas, he desisted 
from that war and chose to undertake other's 
duties like living on alms etc. It is thus that in the 
case of all creatures whose minds come under the 
sway of the defects of sorrow, delusion, etc. there 
verily follows, as a matter of course, abandoning 
their own duties and resorting to prohibited ones. 
Even when they engage in their own duties their 
actions with speech, mind, body, etc., are certainly 
motivated by hankering for rewards, and are 
accompanied by egoism. [Egoism consists in 
thinking that one is the agent of some work and the 
enjoyer of its reward.] Such being the case, the 
cycle of births and deaths -- characterized by 
passing through desireable and undesirable births, 
and meeting with happiness, sorrow, etc. [From 
virtuous deeds follow attainment of heaven and 
happiness. From unvirtuous, sinful deeds follow 
births as beasts and other lowly beings, and 
sorrow. From the performance of both virtuous 
and sinful deeds follows birth as a human being, 
with a mixture of happiness and sorrow.] from the 
accumulation of virtue and vice, continues 
unendingly. Thus, sorrow and delusion are 
therefore the sources of the cycles of births and 
deaths. And their cessation comes from nothing 
other than the knowledge of the Self which is 
preceded by the renunciation of all duties. Hence, 
wishing to impart that (knowledge of the Self) for 
favouring the whole world, Lord Vasudeva, 
making Arjuna the medium, said, 'You grieve for 
those who are not to be grieved for,' etc. As to that 
some (opponents) [According to A.G. the opponent 
is the Vrttikara who, in the opinion of A. 
Mahadeva Sastri, is none other than Bodhayana 
referred to in Sankaracarya's commentary on B.S. 1.1.11-19.-Tr.] 
say: Certainly, Liberation cannot be 
attained merely from continuance in the 
knowledge of the Self which is preceded by 
renunciation of all duties and is independent of 
any other factor. What then? The well-ascertained 
conclusion of the whole of the Gita is that 
Liberation is attained through Knowledge 
associated with rites and duties like Agnihotra etc. 
prescribed in the Vedas and the Smrtis. And as an 
indication of this point of view they quote (the 
verses): 'On the other hand, if you will not fight 
this righteous (battle)' (33); 'Your right is for action 
(rites and duties) alone' (47); 'Therefore you 
undertake action (rites and duties) itself' (4.15), etc. 
Even this objection should not be raised that Vedic 
rites and duties lead to sin since they involve 
injury etc.'. Objection: How? Opponent: The duties 
of the Ksatriyas, charaterized by war, do not lead 
to sin when undertaken as one's duty, even though 
they are extremely cruel since they involve 
violence against elders, brothers, sons and others. 
And from the Lord's declaration that when they 
are not performed, 'then, forsaking your own duty 
and fame, you will incur sin' (33), it stands out as 
(His) clearly stated foregone conclusion that one's 
own duties prescribed in such texts as, '(One shall 
perform Agnihotra) as long as one lives' etc., and 
actions which involve crutely to animals etc. are 
not sinful. Vedantin: That is wrong because of the 
assertion of the distinction between firm adherence 
(nistha) to Knowledge and to action, which are 
based on two (different) convictions (buddhi). The 
nature of the Self, the supreme Reality, determined 
by the Lord in the text beginning with 'Those who 
are not to be grieved for' (11) and running to the 
end of the verse, 'Even considering your own duty' 
(31), is called Sankhya. Sankhya-buddhi [Sankhya 
is that correct (samyak) knowledge of the Vedas 
which reveals (khyayate) the reality of the Self, the 
supreme Goal. The Reality under discussion, 
which is related to this sankhya by way of having 
been revealed by it, is Sankhya.] (Conviction about 
the Reality) is the conviction with regard to That 
(supreme Reality) arising from the ascertainment 
of the meaning of the context [Ascertainment...of 
the context, i.e., of the meaning of the verses 
starting from, 'Never is this One born, and never 
does It die,' etc. (20).] -- that the Self is not an agent 
because of the absence in It of the six kinds of 
changes, viz birth etc. [Birth, continuance, growth, 
transformation, decay and death.] Sankhyas are 
those men of Knowledge to whom that (conviction) 
becomes natural. Prior to the rise of this Conviction 
(Sankhya-buddhi), the ascertained [Ast. and A.G. 
omit this word 'ascertainment, nirupana'-Tr.] of the 
performance of the disciplines leading to 
Liberation -- which is based on a discrimination 
between virtue and vice, [And adoration of God]. 
and which presupposes the Self's difference from 
the body etc. and Its agentship and enjoyership -- is 
called Yoga. The conviction with regard to that 
(Yoga) is Yoga-buddhi. The performers of rites and 
duties, for whom this (conviction) is appropriate, 
are called yogis. Accordingly, the two distinct 
Convictions have been pointed out by the Lord in 
the verse, 'This wisdom (buddhi) has been 
imparted to you from the standpoint of Self realization (Sankhya). But listen to this (wisdom) 
from the standpoint of (Karma-) yoga' (39). And of 
these two, the Lord will separately speak, with 
reference to the Sankhyas, of the firm adherence to 
the Yoga of Knowledge. [Here Yoga and 
Knowledge are identical. Yoga is that through 
which one gets connected, identified. with 
Brahman.] which is based on Sankya-buddhi, in, 
'Two kinds of adherences were spoken of by Me in 
the form of the Vedas, in the days of yore.' [This 
portion is ascending to G1.Pr. and A.A.; Ast. omits 
this and quotes exactly the first line of 3.3. By 
saying, 'in the form of the Vedas', the Lord 
indicates that the Vedas, which are really the 
knowledge inherent in God and issue out of Him, 
are identical with Himself.-Tr.] similarly, in, 
'through the Yoga of Action for the yogis' (3.3), He 
will separately speak of the firm adherence to the 
Yoga [Here also Karma and Yoga are identical, and 
lead to Liberation by bringing about purity of heart 
which is followed by steadfastness in Knowledge.] 
of Karma which is based on Yoga-buddhi 
(Conviction about Yoga). Thus, the two kinds of 
steadfastness -- that based on the conviction about 
the nature of the Self, and that based on the 
conviction about rites and duties -- have been 
distinctly spoken of by the Lord Himself, who saw 
that the coexistence of Knowledge and rites and 
duties is not possible in the same person, they 
being based on the convictions of non-agentship 
and agentship, unity and diversity (respectively). 
As is this teaching about the distinction (of the two 
adherences), just so has it been revealed in the 
Satapatha Brahmana: 'Desiring this world (the Self) 
alone monks and Brahmanas renounce their 
homes' (cf. Br. 4.4.22). After thus enjoining 
renunciation of all rites and duties, it is said in 
continuation, 'What shall we acheive through 
childeren, we who have attained this Self, this 
world (result).' [The earlier quotation implies an 
injuction (vidhi) for renunciation, and the second is 
an arthavada, or an emphasis on that injunction. 
Arthavada: A sentence which usually recommends 
a vidhi, or precept, by stating the good arising 
from its proper observance, and the evils arising 
from its omission; and also by adducing historical 
instances in its support.-V.S.A] Again, there itself it 
is said that, before accepting a wife a man is in his 
natural state [The state of ignorance owing to non realization of Reality. Such a person is a 
Brahmacarin, who goes to a teacher for studying 
the Vedas]. And (then) after his enquiries into rites 
and duties, [The Brahmacarin first studies the 
Vedas and then enquires into their meaning. 
Leaving his teacher's house after completing his 
course, he becomes a house holder.] 'he' for the 
attainment of the three worlds [This world, the 
world of manes and heaven.-Tr.] 'desired' (see Br.1.4.17) 
as their means a son and the two kinds of 
wealth consists of rites and duties that lead to the 
world of manes, and the divine wealth of 
acquisition of vidya (meditation) which leads to 
heaven. In this way it is shown that rites and duties 
enjoined by the Vedas etc. are meant only for one 
who is unenlightened and is possessed of desire. 
And in the text, 'After renouncing they take to 
mendicancy' (see Br. 4.4.22), the injunction to 
renounce is only for one who desires the world 
that is the Self, and who is devoid of hankering (for 
anything else). Now, if the intention of the Lord 
were the combination of Knowledge with Vedic 
rites and duties, then this utterance (of the Lord) 
(3.3) about the distinction would have been 
illogical. Nor would Arjuna's question, 'If it be 
your opinion that wisdom (Knowledge) is superior 
to action (rites and duties)...,' etc. (3.1) be proper. If 
the Lord had not spoken earlier of the impossibility 
of the pursuit of Knowledge and rites and duties 
by the same person (at the same time), then how 
could Arjuna falsely impute to the Lord -- by 
saying, 'If it be your opinion that wisdom is 
superior to action....' -- (of having spoken) what 
was not heard by him, viz the higher status of 
Knowledge over rites and duties? Moreover, if it be 
that the combination of Knowledge with rites and 
duties was spoken of for all, then it stands 
enjoined, ipso facto, on Arjuna as well. Therefore, if 
instruction had been given for practising both, then 
how could the question about 'either of the two' 
arise as in, 'Tell me for certain one of these (action 
and renunciation) by which I may attain the 
highest Good' (3.2)? Indeed, when a physician tells 
a patient who has come for a cure of his biliousness 
that he should take things which are sweet and 
soothing, there can arise no such request as, 'Tell 
me which one of these two is to be taken as a 
means to cure biliousness'! Again, if it be imagined 
that Arjuna put the question because of his non comprehension of the distinct meaning of what the 
Lord had said, even then the Lord ought to have 
answered in accordance with the question: 'The 
combination of Knowledge with rites and duties 
was spoken of by Me. Why are you confused thus?' 
On the other hand, it was not proper to have 
answered, 'Two kinds of steadfastness were 
spoken of by Me it the days of yore,' in a way that 
was inconsistent and at variance with the question. 
Nor even do all the statements about distinction 
etc. become logical if it were intended that 
Knowledge was to be combined with rites and 
duties enjoined by the Smrtis only. Besides, the 
accusation in the sentence, 'Why then do you urge 
me to horrible action' (3.1) becomes illogical on the 
part of Arjuna who knew that fighting was a 
Ksatriya's natural duty enjoined by the Smrtis. 
Therefore, it is not possible for anyone to show that 
in the scripture called the Gita there is any 
combination, even in the least, of Knowledge of the 
Self with rites and duties enjoined by the Srutis or 
the Smrtis. But in the case of a man who had 
engaged himself in rites and duties because of 
ignorance and defects like the attachment, and then 
got his mind purified through sacrifices, charities 
or austerities (see Br. 4.4.22), there arises the 
knowledge about the supreme Reality -- that all 
this is but One, and Brahman is not an agent (of 
any action). With regard to him, although there is a 
cessation of rites and duties as also of the need for 
them, yet, what may, appear as his diligent 
continuance, just as before, in those rites and duties 
for setting an example before people -- that is no 
action in which case it could have stood combined 
with Knowledge. Just as the actions of Lord 
Vasudeva, in the form of performance of the duty 
of a Ksatriya, do not get combined with 
Knowledge for the sake of achieving the human 
goal (Liberation), similar is the case with the man 
of Knowledge because of the absence of hankering 
for results and agentship. Indeed, a man who has 
realized the Truth does not thingk 'I am doing 
(this)' nor does he hanker after its result. Again, as 
for instance, person hankering after such desirable 
things as heaven etc. may light up a fire for 
performing such rites as Agnihotra etc. which are 
the mans to attain desirable things; [The Ast. 
reading is: Agnihotradi-karma-laksana-dharma anusthanaya, for the performance of duties in the 
form of acts like Agnihotra etc.-Tr.] then, while he 
is still engaged in the performance of Agnihotra 
etc. as the means for the desirable things, the desire 
may get destroyed when the rite is half-done. He 
may nevertheless continue the performance of 
those very Agnihotra etc.; but those performance of 
those very Agnihotra etc.; but those Agnihotra etc. 
cannot be held to be for this personal gain. 
Accordingly does the Lord also show in various 
places that, 'even while perfroming actions,' he 
does not act, 'he does not become tainted' (5.7). As 
for the texts, '...as was performed earlier by the 
ancient ones' (4.15), 'For Janaka and others strove 
to attain Liberation through action itself' (3.20), 
they are to be understood analytically. Objection: 
How so? Vedantin: As to that, if Janaka and others 
of old remained engaged in activity even though 
they were knowers of Reality, they did so for 
preventing people from going astray, while 
remaining established in realization verily through 
the knowledge that 'the organs rest (act) on the 
objects of the organs' (3.28). The idea is this that, 
though the occasion for renunciation of activity did 
arise, they remained established in realization 
along with actions; they did not give up their rites 
and duties. On the other hand, if they were not 
knowers of Reality, then the explanation should be 
this; Through the discipline of dedicating rites and 
duties to God, Janaka and others remained 
established in perfection (samsiddhi) either in the 
form of purification of mind or rise of Knowledge. 
This very idea [The idea that rites and duties 
become the cause of Knowledge through the 
purification of the mind.] will be expressed by the 
Lord in, '(the yogis) undertake action for the 
purification of oneself (i.e. of the heart, or the 
mind)' (5.11). After having said, 'A human being 
achieves success by adoring Him through his own 
duties' [By performing one's own duty as enjoined 
by scriptures and dedicating their results to God, 
one's mind becomes purified. Then, through Gods 
grace one becomes fit for steadfastness in 
Knowledge. From that steadfatness follows 
Liberation. Therefore rites and duites do not 
directly lead to Liberation. (See Common. under 5.12) (18.46), He will again speak of the 
steadfastness in Knowledge of a person who has 
attained success, in the text, '(Understand...from 
Me...that process by which) one who has achieved 
success attains Brahman' (18.50). So, the definite 
conclusion in the Gita is that Liberation is attained 
only from the knowledge of Reality, and not from 
its combination with action. And by pointing out in 
the relevant contexts the (aforesaid) distinction, we 
shall show how this conclusion stands. That being 
so, Lord Vasudeva found that for Arjuna, whose 
mind was thus confused about what ought to be 
done [The ast. and A.A., have an additional word --
mithyajnanavatah, meaning 'who had false 
ignorance'.-Tr.] and who was sunk in a great ocean 
of sorrow, there could be no rescue other than 
through the knowledge of the Self. And desiring to 
rescue Arjuna from that, He said, '(You grieve for) 
those who are not to be grieved for,' etc. by way of 
introducing the knowledge of the Self. [In this Gita 
there are three distinct parts, each part consisting 
of six chapters. These three parts deal with the 
three words of the great Upanisadic saying, 
'Tattvamasi, thou art That', with a view to finding 
out their real meanings. The first six chapters are 
concerned with the word tvam (thou); the 
following six chapters determine the meaning of 
the word tat (that); and the last six reveal the 
essential identity of tvam and tat. The disciplines 
necessary for realization this identity are stated in 
the relevant places.] 
2.11 The Blessed Lord said -- You grieve for whose 
who are not to be grieved for; and you speak 
words of wisdom! The learned do not grieve for 
the departed and those who have not departed. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.11 Bhisma, Drona and others are not to be 
grieved for, because they are of noble character 
and are eternal in their real nature. With regard to 
them, asocyan, who are not to be grieved for; tvam, 
you; anvasocah, grieve, (thinking) 'They die 
because of me; without them what shall I do with 
dominion and enjoyment?'; ca, and; bhasase, you 
speak; prajnavadan, words of wisdom, words used 
by men of wisdom, of intelligence. The idea is, 
'Like one mad, you show in yourself this 
foolishness and learning which are contradictory.' 
Because, panditah, the learned, the knowers of the 
Self -- panda means wisdon about the Self; those 
indeed who have this are panditah, one the 
authority of the Upanisadic text, '...the knowers of 
Brahman, having known all about scholarship,...' 
(Br. 3.5.1) ['Therefore the knowers of Brahman, 
having known all about scholorship, should try to 
live upon that strength which comes of 
Knowledge; having known all about this strength 
as well as scholorship, he becomes meditative; 
having known all about both meditativeness and 
its opposite, he becomes a knower of Brahman.'] -- ; 
na anusocanti, do not grieve for; gatasun, the 
departed, whose life has become extinct; agatasun 
ca, and for those who have not departed, whose 
life has not left, the living. The ideas is, 'Your are 
sorrowing for those who are eternal in the real 
sense, and who are not to be grieved for. Hence 
your are a fool!.' 
2.12 But certainly (it is) not (a fact) that I did not 
exist at any time; nor you, nor these rulers of men. 
And surely it is not that we all shall cease to exist 
after this. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.12 Why are they not to be grieved for? Because 
they are eternal. How? Na tu eva, but certainly it is 
not (a fact); that jatu, at any time; aham, I ; na asam, 
did not exist; on the contrary, I did exist. The idea 
is that when the bodies were born or died in the 
past, I existed eternally. [Here Ast. adds ghatadisu 
viyadiva, like Space in pot etc.-Tr.] Similarly, na
tvam, nor is it that you did not exist; but you surely 
existed. Ca, and so also; na ime, nor is it that these ; 
jana-adhipah, rulers of men, did not exist. On the 
other hand, they did exist. And similarly, na eva, it 
is surely not that; vayam, we; sarve, all; na 
bhavisyamah, shall cease to exist; atah param, after 
this, even after the destruction of this body. On the 
contrary, we shall exist. The meaning is that even 
in all the three times (past, present and future) we 
are eternal in our nature as the Self. The plural 
number (in we) is used following the diversity of 
the bodies, but not in the sense of the multiplicity 
of the Self. 
2.13 As are boyhood, youth and decrepitude to an 
embodied being in this (present) body, similar is 
the acquisition of another body. This being so, an 
intelligent person does not get deluded. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.13 As to that, to show how the Self is eternal, the 
Lord cites an illustration by saying,'...of the 
embodied,' etc. Yatha, as are, the manner in which; 
kaumaram, boyhood; yauvanam, youth, middle 
age; and jara, decrepitude, advance of age; 
dehinah, to an embodied being, to one who 
possesses a body (deha), to the Self possessing a 
body; asmin, in this, present; dehe, body --. These 
three states are mutually distinct. On these, when 
the first state gets destroyed the Self does not get 
destroyed; when the second state comes into being 
It is not born. What then? It is seen that the Self, 
which verily remains unchanged, acquires the 
second and third states. Tatha, similar, indeed; is 
Its, the unchanging Self's dehantarapraptih, 
acquisition of another body, a body different from 
the present one. This is the meaning. Tatra, this 
being so; dhirah, an intelligent person; na, does 
not; muhyati, get deluded. 
2.14 But the contacts of the organs with the objects 
are the producers of cold and heat, happiness and 
sorrow. They have a beginning and an end, (and) 
are transient. Bear them, O descendant of Bharata. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.14 'In the case of a man who knows that the Self 
is eternal, although there is no possibility of 
delusion concerning the destruction of the Self, still 
delusion, as of ordinary people, caused by the 
experience of cold, heat, happiness and sorrow is 
noticed in him. Delusion arises from being 
deprived of happiness, and sorrow arises from 
contact with pain etc.' apprehending this kind of a 
talk from Arjuna, the Lord said, 'But the contacts of 
the organs,' etc. Matra-sparsah, the contacts of the 
organs with objects; are sita-usna-sukha-duhkha dah, producers of cold, heat, happiness and 
sorrow. Matrah means those by which are marked 
off (measured up) sounds etc., i.e. the organs of 
hearing etc. The sparsah, contacts, of the organs 
with sound etc. are matra-sparsah. Or, sparsah 
means those which are contacted, i.e. objects, viz 
sound etc. Matra-sparsah, the organs and objects, 
are the producers of cold, heat, happiness and 
sorrow. Cold sometimes produces pleasure, and 
sometimes pain. Similarly the nature of heat, too, is 
unpredictable. On the other hand, happiness and 
sorrow have definite natures since they do not 
change. Hence they are mentioned separately from 
cold and heat. Since they, the organs, the contacts, 
etc., agamapayinah, have a beginning and an end, 
are by nature subject to origination and 
destruction; therefore, they are anityah, transient. 
Hence, titiksasva, bear; tan, them -- cold, heart, etc., 
i.e. do not be happy or sorry with regard to them. 
2.15 O (Arjuna, who are) foremost among men, 
verily, the person whom these do not torment, the 
wise man to whom sorrow and happhiness are the 
same -- he is fit for Immortality. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.15 What will happen to one who bears cold and 
heat? Listen: Verily, the person...,'etc. (O Arjuna) 
hi, verily; yam purusam, the person whom; ete, 
these, cold and heat mentioned above; na, do not; 
vyathayanti, torment, do not perturb; dhiram, the 
wise man; sama-duhkha-sukham, to whom sorrow 
and happiness are the same, who is free from 
happiness and sorrow when subjected to pleasure 
and pain, because of his realization of the enternal 
Self; sah, he, who is established in the realization of 
the enternal Self, who forbears the opposites; 
kalpate, becomes fit; amrtattvaya, for Immortality, 
for the state of Immortality, i.e. for Liberation. 
2.16 Of the unreal there is no being; the real has no 
nonexistence. But the nature of both these, indeed, 
has been realized by the seers of Truth. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.16 Since 'the unreal has no being,' etc., for this
reason also it is proper to bear cold, heat, etc. 
without becoming sorrowful or deluded. Asatah, 
of the unreal, of cold, heat, etc. together with their 
causes; na vidyate, there is no; bhavah, being, 
existence, reality; because heat, cold, etc. together 
with their causes are not substantially real when 
tested by means of proof. For they are changeful, 
and whatever is changeful is inconstant. As 
configurations like pot etc. are unreal since they are 
not perceived to be different from earth when 
tested by the eyes, so also are all changeful things 
unreal because they are not perceived to be 
different from their (material) causes, and also 
because they are not perceived before (their) 
origination and after destruction. Objection: If it be 
that [Here Ast. has the additional words 'karyasya 
ghatadeh, the effect, viz pot etc. (and)'.-Tr.] such 
(material) causes as earth etc. as also their causes 
are unreal since they are not perceived differently 
from their causes, in that case, may it not be urged 
that owing to the nonexistence of those (causes) 
there will arise the contingency of everything 
becoming unreal [An entity cannot be said to be 
unreal merely because it is non-different from its 
cause. Were it to be asserted as being unreal, then 
the cause also should be unreal, because there is no 
entity which is not subject to the law of cuase and 
effect.]? Vedantin: No, for in all cases there is the 
experience of two awarenesses, viz the awareness 
of reality, and the awareness of unreality. [In all 
cases of perception two awarenesses are involved: 
one is invariable, and the other is variable. Since 
the variable is imagined on the invariable, 
therefore it is proved that there is something which 
is the substratum of all imagination, and which is 
neither a cause nor an effect.] That in relation to 
which the awareness does not change is real; that 
in relation to which it changes is unreal. Thus, 
since the distinction between the real and the 
unreal is dependent on awareness, therefore in all 
cases (of empirical experiences) everyone has two 
kinds of awarenesses with regard to the same 
substratum: (As for instance, the experiences) 'The 
pot is real', 'The cloth is real', 'The elephant is real' -
- (which experiences) are not like (that of) 'A blue 
lotus'. [In the empirical experience, 'A blue lotus', 
there are two awarenesses concerned with two 
entities, viz the substance (lotus) and the quality 
(blueness). In the case of the experience, 'The pot is 
real', etc. the awarenesses are not concerned with 
substratum and qualities, but the awareness of 
pot,of cloth, etc. are superimposed on the 
awareness of 'reality', like that of 'water' in a 
mirage.] This is how it happens everywhere. [The 
coexistence of 'reality' and 'pot' etc. are valid only 
empirically -- according to the non-dualists; 
whereas the coexistence of 'blueness' and 'lotus' is 
real according to the dualists.] Of these two 
awareness, the awareness of pot etc. is inconstant; 
and thus has it been shown above. But the 
awareness of reality is not (inconstant). Therefore 
the object of the awareness of pot etc. is unreal 
because of inconstancy; but not so the object of the 
awareness of reality, because of its constancy. 
Objection: If it be argued that, since the awareness 
of pot also changes when the pot is destroyed, 
therefore the awareness of the pot's reality is also 
changeful? Vedantin: No, because in cloth etc. the 
awareness of reality is seen to persist. That 
awareness relates to the odjective (and not to the 
noun 'pot'). For this reason also it is not destroyed. 
[This last sentence has been cited in the f.n. of A.A.-
Tr.] Objection: If it be argued that like the 
awareness of reality, the awareness of a pot also 
persists in other pots? Vedantin: No, because that 
(awareness of pot) is not present in (the awareness 
of) a cloth etc. Objection: May it not be that even 
the awareness of reality is not present in relation to 
a pot that has been destroyed? Vedantin: No, 
because the noun is absent (there). Since the 
awareness of reality corresponds to the adjective 
(i.e. it is used adjectivelly), therefore, when the 
noun is missing there is no possibility of its (that 
awareness) being an adjective. So, to what should it 
relate? But, again, the awareness of reality (does 
not cease) with the absence of an object.. [Even 
when a pot is absent and the awareness of reality 
does not arise with regard to it, the awareness of 
reality persists in the region where the pot had 
existed. Some read nanu in place of na tu ('But, 
again'). In that case, the first portion 
(No,...since...adjective. So,...relate?) is a statement 
of the Vedantin, and the Objection starts from nanu 
punah sadbuddheh, etc. so, the next Objection will 
run thus: 'May it not be said that, when nouns like 
pot etc. are absent, the awareness of existence has 
no noun to qualify, and therefore it becomes 
impossible for it (the awareness of existence) to 
exist in the same substratum?'-Tr.] Objection: May 
it not be said that, when nouns like pot etc. are 
absent, (the awareness of existence has no noun to 
qualify and therefore) it becomes impossible for it 
to exist in the same substratum? [The relationship 
of an adjective and a noun is seen between two real 
entities. Therefore, if the relationship between 'pot' 
and 'reality' be the same as between a noun and an 
adjective, then both of them will be real entities. So, 
the coexistence of reality with a non-pot does not 
stand to reason.] Vedantin: No, because in such 
experiences as, 'This water exists', (which arises on 
seeing a mirage etc.) it is observed that there is a 
coexistence of two objects though one of them is 
non-existent. Therefore, asatah, of the unreal, viz 
body etc. and the dualities (heat, cold, etc.), 
together with their causes; na vidyate, there is no; 
bhavah, being. And similarly, satah, of the real, of 
the Self; na vidyate, there is no; abhavah, 
nonexistence, because It is constant everywhere. 
This is what we have said. Tu, but; antah, the 
nature, the conclusion (regarding the nature of the 
real and the unreal) that the Real is verily real, and 
the unreal is verily unreal; ubhayoh api, of both 
these indeed, of the Self and the non-Self, of the 
Real and the unreal, as explained above; drstah, 
has been realized thus; tattva-darsibhih, by the 
seers of Truth. Tat is a pronoun (Sarvanama, lit. 
name of all) which can be used with regard to all. 
And all is Brahman. And Its name is tat. The 
abstraction of tat is tattva, the true nature of 
Brahman. Those who are apt to realize this are 
tattva-darsinah, seers of Truth. Therefore, you too, 
by adopting the vision of the men of realization 
and giving up sorrow and delusion, forbear the 
dualities, heat, cold, etc. -- some of which are 
definite in their nature, and others inconstant --, 
mentally being convinced that this (phenomenal 
world) is changeful, verily unreal and appears 
falsely like water in a mirage. This is the idea. 
What, again, is that reality which remains verily as 
the Real and surely for ever? This is being 
answered in, 'But know That', etc. 
2.17 But know That to be indestructible by which 
all this is pervaded. None can bring about the 
destruction of this Immutable. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.17 Tu, but -- this word is used for distinguishing 
(reality) from unreality; tat viddhi, know That; to 
be avinasi, indestructible, by nature not subject to 
destruction; what? (that) yena, by which, by which 
Brahman called Reality; sarvam, all; idam, this, the 
Universe together with space; is tatam, pervaded, 
as pot etc. are pervaded by space. Na kascit, none; 
arhati, can; kartum, bring about; vinasam, the 
destruction, disappearance, nonexistence; asya, of 
this avyayasya, of the Immutable, that which does 
not undergo growth and depletion. By Its very 
nature this Brahman called Reality does not suffer 
mutation, because, unlike bodies etc., It has no 
limbs; nor (does It suffer mutation) by (loss of 
something) belonging to It, because It has nothing 
that is Its own. Brahman surely does not suffer loss 
like Devadatta suffering from loss of wealth. 
Therefore no one can bring about the destruction of 
this immutable Brahman. No one, not even God 
Himself, can destroy his own Self, because the Self 
is Brahman. Besides, action with regard to one's 
Self is self-contradictory. Which, again, is that 
'unreal' that is said to change its own nature? This 
is being answered: 
2.18 These destructible bodies are said to belong to 
the everlasting, indestructible, indeterminable, 
embodied One. Therefore, O descendant of 
Bharata, join the battle. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.18 Ime, these; antavantah, destructible; dehah, 
bodies -- as the idea of reality which continues with 
regard to water in a mirage, etc. gets eliminated 
when examined with the means of knowledge, and 
that is its end, so are these bodies and they have an 
end like bodies etc. in dream and magic --; uktah, 
are said, by discriminating people; to belong 
nityasya, to the everlasting; anasinah, the 
indestructible; aprameyasya, the indeterminable; 
sarirnah, embodied One, the Self. This is the 
meaning. The two words 'everlasting' and 
'indestructible' are not repetitive, because in 
common usage everlastingness and destructibility 
are of two kinds. As for instance, a body which is 
reduced to ashes and has disappeared is said to 
have been destoryed. (And) even while existing, 
when it becomes transfigured by being afflicted 
with diseases etc. it is said to be 'destroyed'. [Here 
the A.A. adds 'tatha dhana-nase-apyevam, similar 
is the case even with regard to loss of wealth.'-Tr.] 
That being so, by the two words 'everlasting' and 
'indestructible' it is meant that It is not subject to 
both kinds of distruction. Otherwise, the 
everlastingness of the Self would be like that of the 
earth etc. Therefore, in order that this contingency 
may not arise, it is said, 'Of the everlasting, 
indestructible'. Aprameyasya, of the 
indeterminable, means 'of that which cannot be 
determined by such means of knowledge as direct 
perception etc.' Objection: Is it not that the Self is 
determined by the scriptures, and before that 
through direct perception etc.? Vedantin: No, 
because the Self is self-evident. For, (only) when 
the Self stands predetermined as the knower, there 
is a search for a means of knolwedge by the 
knower. Indeed, it is not that without first 
determining oneself as, 'I am such', one takes up 
the task of determining an object of knowledge. For 
what is called the 'self' does not remain unknown 
to anyone. But the scripture is the final authority 
[when the Vedic text establishes Brahman as the 
innermost Self, all the distinctions such as knower, 
known and the means of knowledge become 
sublated. Thus it is reasonable that the Vedic text 
should be the final authority. Besides, its authority 
is derived from its being faultless in as much as it 
has not originated from any human being.]: By 
way of merely negating superimposition of 
qualities that do not belong to the Self, it attains 
authoritativeness with regard to the Self, but not 
by virtue of making some unknown thing known. 
There is an Upanisadic text in support of this: '...the 
Brahman that is immediate and direct, the Self that 
is within all' (Br. 3.4.1). Since the Self is thus eternal 
and unchanging, tasmat, therefore; yudhyasva, 
you join the battle, i.e. do not desist from the war. 
Here there is no injunction to take up war as a 
duty, because be (Arjuna), though he was 
determined for war, remains silent as a result of 
being overpowered by sorrow and delusion. 
Therefore, all that is being done by the Lord is the 
removal of the obstruction to his duty. 'Therefore, 
join the battle' is only an approval, not an 
injunction. The scripture Gita is intended for 
eradicating sorrow, delusion, etc. which are the 
cases of the cycle of births and deaths; it is not 
intended to enjoin action. As evidences of this idea 
the Lord cites two Vedic verses: [Ka. 1.2.19-20. 
There are slight verbal differences.-Tr.] 
2.19 He who thinks of this One as the killer, and he 
who thinks of this One as the killed -- both of them 
do not know. This One does not kill, nor is It killed. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.19 But the ideas that you have, 'Bhisma and 
others are neing killed by me in war; I am surely 
their killer' -- this idea of yours is false. How? Yah, 
he who; vetti, thinks; of enam, this One, the 
embodied One under consideration; as hantaram, 
the killer, the agent of the act of killing; ca, and; 
yah, he who, the other who; manyate, thinks; of 
enam, this One; as hatam, the killed -- (who thinks) 
'When the body is killed, I am myself killed; I 
become the object of the act of killing'; ubhau tau, 
both of them; owing to non-discrimination, na, do 
not; vijanitah, know the Self which is the subject of 
the consciousness of 'I'. The meaning is: On the 
killing of the body, he who thinks of the Self (-- the 
content of the consciousness of 'I' --) [The Ast. 
omits this phrase from the precedig sentence and 
includes it in this place. The A.A. has this phrase in 
both the places.-Tr.] as 'I am the killer', and he who 
thinks, 'I have been killed', both of them are 
ignorant of the nature of the Self. For, ayam, this 
Self; owing to Its changelessness, na hanti, does not 
kill, does not become the agent of the act of killing; 
na hanyate, nor is It killed, i.e. It does not become 
the object (of the act of killing). The second verse is 
to show how the Self is changeless: 
2.20 Never is this One born, and never does It die; 
nor is it that having come to exist, It will again 
cease to be. This One is birthless, eternal, 
undecaying, ancient; It is not killed when the body 
is killed. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.20 Na kadacit, neverl; is ayam, this One; jayate, 
born i.e. the Self has no change in the form of being 
born -- to which matter is subject --; va, and (-- va is 
used in the sense of and); na mriyate, It never dies. 
By this is denied the final change in the form of 
destruction. The word (na) kadacit), never, is 
connected with the denial of all kinds of changes 
thus -- never, is It born never does It die, and so on. 
Since ayam, this Self; bhutva, having come to exist, 
having experienced the process of origination; na, 
will not; bhuyah, again; abhavita, cease to be 
thereafter, therefore It does not die. For, in 
common parlance, that which ceases to exist after 
coming into being is said to die. From the use of 
the word va, nor, and na, it is understood that, 
unlike the body, this Self does not again come into 
existence after having been non-existent. Therefore 
It is not born. For, the words, 'It is born', are used 
with regard to something which comes into 
existence after having been non-existent. The Self is 
not like this. Therfore It is not born. Since this is so, 
therefore It is ajah, birthless; and since It does not 
die, therefore It is nityah, eternal. Although all 
changes become negated by the denial of the first 
and the last kinds of changes, still changes 
occuring in the middle [For the six kinds of 
changes see note under verse 2.10.-Tr.] should be 
denied with their own respective terms by which 
they are implied. Therefore the text says sasvatah, 
undecaying,. so that all the changes, viz youth etc., 
which have not been mentioned may become 
negated. The change in the form of decay is denied 
by the word sasvata, that which lasts for ever. In Its 
own nature It does not decay because It is free 
from parts. And again, since it is without qualities, 
there is no degeneration owing to the decay of any 
quality. Change in the form of growth, which is 
opposed to decay, is also denied by the word 
puranah, ancient. A thing that grows by the 
addition of some parts is said to increase and is 
also said to be new. But this Self was fresh even in 
the past due to Its partlessness. Thus It is puranah, 
i.e. It does not grow. So also, na hanyate, It is 
puranah, i.e. It does not grow. So also, na hanyate, 
It is not killed, It does not get transformed; even 
when sarire, the body; hanyamane, is killed, 
transformed. The verb 'to kill' has to be understood 
here in the sense of transformation, so that a 
tautology [This verse has already mentioned 
'death' in the first line. If the verb han, to kill, is 
also taken in the sense of killing, then a tautology is 
unavoidable.-Tr.] may be avoided. In this mantra 
the six kinds of transformations, the material 
changes seen in the world, are denied in the Self. 
The meaning of the sentence is that the Self is
devoid of all kinds of changes. Since this is so, 
therefore 'both of them do not know' -- this is how 
the present mantra is connected to the earlier 
mantra. 
2.21 O Partha, he who knows this One as 
indestructible, eternal, birthless and undecaying, 
how and whom does that person kill, or whom 
does he cause to be killed! [This is not a question 
but only an emphatic denial.-Tr.] 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.21 In the mantra, 'He who thinks of this One as 
the killer,' having declared that (the Self) does not 
become the agent or the object of the actof killing, 
and then in the mantra, 'Never is this One born,' 
etc., having stated the reasons for (Its) 
changelessness, the Lord sums up the purport of 
what was declared above: He who knows this One 
as indestructible, etc. Yah, he who; veda, knows --
yah is to be thus connected with Veda --; enam, this 
One, possessing the characteristics stated in the 
earlier mantra; as avinasinam, indestructible, 
devoid of the final change of state; nityam, eternal, 
devoid of transformation; ajam, birthless; and 
avyayam, undecaying; katham, how, in what way; 
(and kam, whom;) does sah, that man of 
realization; purusah, the person who is himself an 
authority [i.e. above all injunctions and 
prohibitions. See 18.16.17.-Tr.]; hanti, kill, 
undertake the act of killing; or how ghatayati, does 
he cause (others) to be killed, (how does he) 
instigate a killer! The intention is to deny both (the 
acts) by saying, 'In no way does he kill any one, nor 
does he cause anyone to be killed', because an 
interrogative sense is absurd (here). Since the 
implication of the reason [The reason for the denial 
of killing etc. is the changelessness of the Self, and 
this reason holds good with regard to all actions of 
the man of realization.-Tr.], viz the immutability of 
the Self, [The A.A. omits 'viz the immutability of 
the Self'.-Tr.] is common (with regard to all 
actions), therefore the negation of all kinds of 
actions in the case of a man of realization is what 
the Lord conveys as the only purport of this 
context. But the denial of (the act of) killing has 
been cited by way of an example. Objection: By 
noticing what special reason for the impossibility 
of actions in the case of the man of realization does 
the Lord deny all actions (in his case) by saying, 
'How can that person,' etc.? Vedantin: Has not the 
immutability of the Self been already stated as the 
reason [Some readings omit this word.-Tr.] , the 
specific ground for the impossibility of all actions? 
Objection: It is true that it has been stated; but that 
is not a specific ground, for the man of realization 
is different from the immutable Self. Indeed, may it 
not be argued that action does not become 
impossible for one who has known as unchanging 
stump of a tree?! Vedantin: No, because of man of 
Knowledge is one with the Self. Enlightenment 
does not belong to the aggregate of body and 
senses. Therefore, as the last laternative, the 
knower is the Immutable and is the Self which is 
not a part of the aggregate. Thus, action being 
impossible for that man of Knowledge, the denial 
in, 'How can that person...,' etc. is reasonable. As 
on account of the lack of knowledge of the 
distinction between the Self and the modifications 
of the intellect, the Self, though verily immutable, 
is imagined through ignorance to be the perceiver 
of objects like sound etc. presented by the intellect 
etc., in this very way, the Self, which in reality is 
immutable, is said to be the 'knower' because of Its 
association with the knowledge of the distinction 
between the Self and non-Self, which (knowledge) 
is a modification of the intellect [By buddhi-vrtti, 
modification of the intellect, is meant the 
transformation of the internal organ into the form 
of an extension upto an object, along with its past 
impressions, the senses concerned, etc., like the 
extension of the light of a lamp illuminating an 
object. Consciousness reflected on this 
transformation and remaining indistinguishable 
from that transformation revealing the object, is 
called objective knowledge. Thereby, due to 
ignorance, the Self is imagined to be the perceiver 
because of Its connection with the vrtti, 
modification. (-A.G.) The process is elsewhere 
described as follows: The vrtti goes out through the 
sense-organ concerned, like the flash of a 
torchlight, and along with it goes the reflection of 
Consciousness. Both of them envelop the object, a 
pot for instance. The vrtti destroys the ignorance 
about the pot; and the reflection of Consciousness, 
becoming unified with only that portion of it 
which has been delimited by the pot, reveals the 
pot. In the case of knowledge of Brahman, it is 
admitted that the vrtti in the form, 'I am Brahman', 
does reach Brahman and destroys ignorance about 
Brahman, but it is not admitted that Brahman is 
revealed like a 'pot', for Brahman is self-effulgent.-
Tr.] and is unreal by nature. From the statement 
that action is impossible for man of realization it is 
understood that the conclusion of the Lord is that, 
actions enjoined by the scriptures are prescribed 
for the unenlightened. Objection: Is not 
elightenment too enjoined for the ignorant? For, 
the injunction about enlightenment to one who has 
already achieved realization is useless, like 
grinding something that has already been ground! 
This being so, the distinction that rites and duties 
are enjoined for the unenlightened, and not for the 
enlightened one, does not stand to reason. 
Vedantin: No. There can reasonable be a 
distinction between the existence or nonexistence 
of a thing to be performed. As after the knowledge 
of the meaning of the injunction for rites like 
Agnihotra etc. their performance becomes 
bligatory on the unenlightened one who thinks, 
'Agnihotra etc. has to be performed by collecting 
various accessories; I am the agent, and this is my 
duty', -- unlike this, nothing remains later on to be 
performed as a duty after knowing the meaning of 
the injunction about the nature of the Self from 
such texts as, 'Never is this One born,' etc. But 
apart from the rise of knowledge regarding the 
unity of the Self, his non-agency, etc., in the form, 'I 
am not the agent, I am not the enjoyer', etc., no 
other idea arises. Thus, this distinction can be 
maintained. Again, for anyone who knows himself 
as, 'I am the agent', there will necessarily arise the 
idea, 'This is my duty.' In relation to that he 
becomes eligible. In this way duties are (enjoined) 
[Ast. adds 'sambhavanti, become possible'.-Tr.] for 
him. And according to the text, 'both of them do 
not know' (19), he is an unenlightened man. And 
the text, 'How can that person,' etc. concerns the 
enlightened person distinguished above, becuase 
of the negation of action (in this text). Therefore, 
the enlightened person distinguished above, who 
has realized the immutable Self, and the seeker of 
Liberation are qualified only for renunciation of all 
rites and duties. Therefore, indeed, the Lord 
Narayana, making a distinction between the 
enlightened man of Knowledge and the 
unenlightened man of rites and duties, makes them 
take up the two kinds of adherences in the text, 
'through the Yoga of Knowledge for the men of 
realization; through the Yoga of Action for the 
yogis' (3.3). Similarly also, Vyasa said to his son, 
'Now, there are these two paths,' etc. ['Now, there 
are these two paths on which the Vedas are based. 
They are thought of as the dharma characterized 
by engagement in duties, and that by renunciation 
of them' (Mbh. Sa. 241.6).-Tr.] So also (there is a 
Vedic text meaning): 'The path of rites and duties, 
indeed, is the earlier, and renunciation comes after 
that.' [Ast. says that this is not a quotation, but only 
gives the purport of Tai, Ar. 10.62.12.-Tr.] The Lord 
will show again and again this very division: 'The 
unenlightened man who is deluded by egoism 
thinks thus: "I am the doer"; but the one who is a 
knower of the facts (about the varieties of the 
gunas) thinks, "I do not act"' (cf. 3.27,28). So also 
there is the text, '(The embodied man of 
selfcontrol,) having given up all actions mentally, 
continues (happily in the town of nine gates)' (5.13) 
etc. With regard to this some wiseacres say: In no 
person does arise the idea, 'I am the changeless, 
actionless Self, which is One and devoid of the six 
kinds of changes beginning with birth to which all 
things are subject', on the occurrence of which
(idea alone) can renunciation of all actions be 
enjoined. That is not correct, because it will lead to 
the needlessness of such scriptural instructions as, 
'Never is this One born,' etc. (20). They should be 
asked: As on the authority of scripural instructions 
there arises the knowledge of the existence of 
virtue and vice and the knowledge regarding an 
agent who gets associated with successive bodies, 
similarly, why should not there arise from the 
scriptures the knowledge of unchangeability, non agentship, oneness, etc. of that very Self? Objection: 
If it be said that this is due to Its being beyond the 
scope of any means (of knowledge)? Vedantin: No, 
because the Sruti says, 'It is to be realized through 
the mind alone, (following the instruction of the 
teacher)' (Br. 4.4.19). The mind that is purified by 
the instructions of the scriptures and the teacher, 
control of the body and organs, etc. becomes the 
instrument for realizing the Self. Again, since there 
exist inference and scriptures for Its realization, it 
is mere bravado to say that Knowledge does not 
arise. And it has to be granted that when 
knowledge arises, it surely eliminates ignorance, its 
opposite. And that ignorance has been shown in, 'I 
am the killer', 'I am killed', and 'both of them do 
not know' (see 2.19). And here also it is shown that 
the idea of the Self being an agent, the object of an 
action, or an indirect agent, is the result of 
ignorance. Also, the Self being changeless, the fact 
that such agentship etc. are cuased by ignorance is 
a common factor in all actions without exception, 
because only that agent who is subject to change 
instigates someone else who is different from 
himself and can be acted on, saying, 'Do this.' Thus, 
with a view to pointing out the absence of fitness 
for rites and duties in the case of an enlightened 
person, the Lord [Ast, adds vasudeva after 'Lord'.-
Tr.] says, 'He who knows this One as 
indestructible,' 'how can that person,' etc. -- thereby 
denying this direct and indirect agentship of an 
enlightened person in respect of all actions without 
exception. As regards the question, 'For what, 
again, is the man of enlightenment qualified?', the 
answer has already been give earlier in, 'through 
the Yoga of Knowledge for the men of realization' 
(3.3). Similarly, the Lord will also speak of 
renunication of all actions in, 'having given up all 
actions mentally,' etc.(5.13). Objection: May it not 
be argued that from the expression, 'mentally', (it 
follows that) oral and bodily actions are not to be 
renounced? Vedantin: No, because of the categoric 
expression, 'all actions'. Objection: May it not be 
argued that 'all actions' relates only to those of the 
mind? Vedantin: No, because all oral and bodily 
actions are preceded by those of the mind, for 
those actions are impossible in the absence of 
mental activity. Objection: May it not be said that 
one has to mentally renounce all other activities 
except the mental functions which are the causes of 
scriptural rites and duties performed through 
speech and body? Vedantin: No, because it has 
been specifically expressed: 'without doing or 
causing (others) to do anything at all' (5.13). 
Objection: May it not be that this renunciation of 
all actions, as stated by the Lord, is with regard to a 
dying man, not one living? Vedantin: No, because 
(in that case) the specific statement, 'The embodied 
man...continues happily in the town of nine gates' 
(ibid.) will become illogical since it is not possible 
for a dead person, who neither acts nor makes 
others act, [The words 'akurvatah akarayatah, (of 
him) who neither acts nor makes others act', have 
been taken as a part of the Commentator's 
arguement. But A.G. points out that they can also 
form a part of the next Objection. In that, case, the 
translation of the Objection will be this: Can it not 
be that the construction of the sentence (under 
discussion) is -- Neither doing nor making others 
do, he rest by depositing (sannyasya, by 
renouncing) in the body', but not 'he rests in the 
body by renouncing...'?] to rest in that body after 
renouncing all actions. Objection: Can it not be that 
the construction of the sentence (under discussion) 
is, '(he rests) by depositing (sannyasya, by 
renouncing) in the body', (but) not 'he rests in the 
body by renouncing...'? Vedantin: No, because 
everywhere it is categorically asserted that the Self 
is changeless. Besides, the action of 'resting' 
requires a location, whereas renunciation is 
independent of this. The word nyasa preceded by 
sam here means 'renunciation', not 'depositing'. 
Therefore, according to this Scripture, viz the Gita, 
the man of realization is eligible for renunciation, 
alone, not for rites and duties. This we shall show 
in the relevant texts later on in the cotext of the 
knowledge of the Self. And now we shall speak of 
the matter on hand: As to that, the indestructibility 
[Indestructibility suggests unchangeability as 
well.] of the Self, has been postulated. What is it 
like? That is being said in, 'As after rejecting 
wornout clothes,' etc. 
2.22 As after rejecting wornout clothes a man takes 
up other new ones, likewise after rejecting wornout 
bodies the embodied one unites with other new 
ones. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.22 Yatha, as in the world; vihaya, after rejecting 
jirnani, wornout; vasamsi, clothes; narah, a man 
grhnati, takes up; aparani, other; navani, new ones; 
tatha, likewise, in that very manner; vihaya, after 
rejecting; jirnani, wornout; sarirani, bodies; dehi, 
the embodied one, the Self which is surely 
unchanging like the man (in the example); samyati, 
unites with; anyani, other; navani, new ones. This 
is meaning. 
2.23 Weapons do not cut It, fire does not burn It, 
water does not moisten It, and air does not dry It. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.23 Why does It verily remain unchanged? This is 
being answered in, 'Weapons do not cut It,' etc. 
Sastrani, weapons; na, do not; chindanti, cut; enam, 
It, the embodied one under discussion. It being 
partless, weapons like sword etc. do not cut off Its 
limbs. So also, even pavakah, fire; na dahati enam, 
does not burn, does not reduce It to ashes. Ca, and 
similarly; apah, water; na enam kledayanti, does 
not moisten It. For water has the power of 
disintegrating a substance that has parts, by the 
process of moistening it. That is not possible in the 
case of the partless Self. Similarly, air destroys an 
oil substance by drying up the oil. Even marutah, 
air; na sosayati, does not dry; (enam, It,) one's own 
Self. [Ast. reads 'enam tu atmanam, but this Self', in 
place of enam svatmanam.-Tr.] 
2.24 It cannot be cut, It cannot be burnt, cannot be 
moistened, and surely cannot be dried up. It is 
eternal, omnipresent, stationary, unmoving and 
changeless. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.24 Since this is so, therefore ayam, It; acchedyah, 
cannot be cut. Since the other elements which are 
the causes of destruction of one ano ther are not 
capable of destroying this Self, therefore It is 
nityah, eternal. Being eternal, It is sarva-gatah, 
omnipresent. Being omnipresent, It is sthanuh, 
stationary, i.e. fixed like a stump. Being fixed, 
ayam, this Self; is acalah, unmoving. Therefore It is 
sanatanah, changeless, i.e. It is not produced from 
any cause, as a new thing. It is not to be argued 
that 'these verses are repetive since eternality and 
changelessness of the Self have been stated in a 
single verse itself, "Never is this One born, and 
never does It die," etc. (20). Whatever has been said 
there (in verse 19) about the Self does not go 
beyond the meaning of this verse. Something is 
repeated with those very words, and something 
ideologically.' Since the object, viz the Self, is 
inscrutable, therefore Lord Vasudeva raises the 
topic again and again, and explains that very object 
in other words so that, somehow, the unmanifest 
Self may come within the comprehension of the 
intellect of the transmigrating persons and bring 
about a cessation of their cycles of births and 
deaths. 
2.25 It is said that This is unmanifest; This is 
inconceivable; This is unchangeable. Therefore, 
having known This thus, you ougth not to grieve. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.25 Moreover, ucyate, it is said that; ayam, This, 
the Self; is avyaktah, unmanifest, since, being 
beyond the ken of all the organs, It cannot be 
objectified. For this very reason, ayam, This; is 
acintyah, inconceivable. For anything that comes 
within the purview of the organs becomes the 
object of thought. But this Self is inconceivable 
becuase It is not an object of the organs. Hence, 
indeed, It is avikaryah, unchangeable. This Self 
does not change as milk does when mixed with 
curd, a curdling medium, etc. And It is chnageless 
owing to partlessness, for it is not seen that any 
non-composite thing is changeful. Not being 
subject to transformation, It is said to be 
changeless. Tasmat, therefore; vidivata, having 
known; enam, this one, the Self; evam, thus, as 
described; na arhasi, you ought not; anusocitum, to 
grieve, thinking, 'I am the slayer of these; these are 
killed by me.' 
2.26 On the other hand, if you think this One is 
born continually or dies constantly, even then, O 
mighty-armed one, you ought not to grieve thus. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.26 This (verse), 'On the other hand,' etc., is 
uttered assuming that the Self is transient. Atha ca, 
on the other hand, if (-- conveys the sense of 
assumption --); following ordinary experience, 
manyase, you think; enam, this One, the Self under 
discussion; is nityajatam, born continually, 
becomes born with the birth of each of the 
numerous bodies; va, or; nityam, constantly; 
mrtam, dies, along with the death of each of these 
(bodies); tatha api, even then, even if the Self be of 
that nature; tvam, you; maha-baho, O mighty armed one; na arhasi, ought not; socitum, to grieve; 
evam, thus, since that which is subject to birth will 
die, and that which is subject to death will be born; 
these two are inevitable. 
2.27 For death of anyone born is certain, and of the 
dead (re-) birth is a certainly. Therefore you ought 
not to grieve over an inevitable fact. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.27 This being so, 'death of anyone born', etc. Hi, 
for; mrtyuh, death; jatasya, of anyone born; 
dhruvah, is certain; is without exception; ca, and 
mrtasya, of the dead; janmah, (re-) birth; is 
dhruvam, a certainly. Tasmat, therefore, this fact, 
viz birth and death, is inevitable. With regard to 
that (fact), apariharye, over an enevitable; arthe, 
fact; tvam, you; na arhasi, ought not; socitum, to 
grieve. 
2.28 O descendant of Bharata, all beings remain 
unmanifest in the beginning;; they become 
manifest in the middle. After death they certainly 
become unmanifest. What lamentation can there be 
with regard to them? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.28 It is not reasonable to grieve even for beings 
which are constituted by bodies and organs, since 
'all beings remain unmanifest' etc. (Bharata, O 
descendant of Bharata;) bhutani, all beings, 
avyaktaduni, remain unmainfest in the beginning. 
Those beings, viz sons, friends, and others, 
constituted by bodies and organs, [Another 
reading is karya-karana-sanghata, aggregates 
formed by material elements acting as causes and 
effects.-Tr.] who before their origination have 
unmanifestedness (avyakta), invisibility, 
nonperception, as their beginning (adi) are 
avyaktaadini. Ca, and; after origination, before 
death, they become vyakta-madhyani, manifest in 
the middle. Again, they eva, certainly; become 
avyakta-nidhanani, unmanifest after death. Those 
which have unmanifestness (avyakta), invisibility, 
as their death (nidhana) are avyakta-nidhanani. 
The idea is that even after death they verily attain 
unmanifestedness. Accordingly has it been said: 
'They emerged from invisibility, and have gone 
back to invisibility. They are not yours, nor are you 
theirs. What is this fruitless lamentation!' (Mbh. St. 2.13). 
Ka, what; paridevana, lamentation, or what 
prattle, can there be; tatra, with regard to them, i.e. 
with regard to beings which are objects of 
delusion, which are invisible, (become) visible, 
(and then) get destroyed! 
2.29 Someone visualizes It as a wonder; and 
similarly indeed, someone else talks of It as a 
wonder; and someone else hears of It as a wonder. 
And some one else, indeed, does not realize It even 
after hearing about It. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.29 'This Self under discussion is inscrutable. Why 
should I blame you alone regarding a thing that is 
a source of delusion to all!' How is this Self 
inscrutable? [It may be argued that the Self is the 
object of egoism. The answer is: Although the 
individualized Self is the object of egoism, the 
absolute Self is not.] This is being answered in, 
'Someone visualizes It as a wonder,' etc. Kascit, 
someone; pasyati, visualizes; enam, It, the Self; 
ascaryavat, as a wonder, as though It were a 
wonder -- a wonder is something not seen before, 
something strange, something seen all on a 
sudden; what is comparable to that is ascarya-vat; 
ca, and; tatha, similarly; eva, indeed; kascit, 
someone; anyah, else; vadati, talks of It as a 
wonder. And someone else srnoti, hears of It as a 
wonder. And someone, indeed, na, does not; veda, 
realize It; api, even; srutva, after hearing, seeing 
and speaking about It. Or, (the meaning is) he who 
sees the Self is like a wonder. He who speaks of It 
and the who hears of It is indeed rare among many 
thousands. Therefore, the idea is that the Self is 
difficult to understand. Now, in the course of 
concluding the topic under discussion, [viz the 
needlessness of sorrow and delusion,from the 
point of view of the nature of things.] He says, 'O 
descendant of Bharata, this embodied Self', etc. 
2.30 O descendant of Bharata, this embodied Self 
existing in everyone's body can never be killed. 
Therefore you ought not to grieve for all (these) 
beings. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.30 Because of being partless and eternal, ayam, 
this dehi, embodied Self; nityam avadhyah, can 
never be killed, under any condition. That being so, 
although existing sarvasya dehe, in all bodies, in 
trees etc., this One cannot be killed on account of 
Its being allpervasive. Since the indewelling One 
cannot be killed although the body of everyone of 
the living beings be killed, tasmat, therefore; tvam, 
you; na arhasi, ought not; socitum, to grieve; for 
sarvani bhutani, all (these) beings, for Bhisma and 
others. Here [i.e. in the earlier verse.] it has been 
said that, from the standpoint of the supreme 
Reality, there is no occasion for sorrow or delusion. 
(This is so) not merely from the standpoint of the 
supreme Reality, but -- 
2.31 Even considering your own duty you should 
not waver, since there is nothing else better for a 
Ksatriya than a righteous battle. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.31 Api, even; aveksya, considering; svadharmam, 
your own duty, the duty of a Ksatriya, viz battle --
considering even that -- ; na arhasi, you ought not; 
vikampitum, to waver, to deviate from the natural 
duty of the Ksatriya, i.e. from what is natural to 
yourself. And hi, since that battle is not devoid of 
righteousness, (but) is supremely righteous -- it 
being conducive to virtue and meant for protection 
of subjects through conquest of the earth --; 
therefore, na vidyate, there is nothing; anyat, else; 
sreyah, better; ksatriyasya, for a ksatriya; than that 
dharmyat, righteous; yuddhat, battle. 
2.32 O son of Partha, happy are the Ksatriyas who 
come across this kind of a battle, which presents 
itself unsought for and which is an open gate to 
heaven. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.32 Why, again, does that battle become a duty? 
This is being answered (as follows) [A specific rule 
is more authoritative than a general rule. Non violence is a general rule enjoined by the 
scriptures, but the duty of fighting is a specific rule 
for a Ksatriya.]: Partha, O son of Partha; are not 
those Ksatiryas sukhinah, happy [Happy in this 
world as also in the other.] who labhante, come 
across; a yuddham, battle; idrsam, of this kind; 
upapannam, which presents itself; yadrcchaya, 
unsought for; and which is an apavrtam, open; 
svarga-dvaram, gate to heaven? [Rites and duties 
like sacrifices etc. yield their results after the lapse 
of some time. But the Ksatriyas go to heaven 
immediatley after dying in battle, because, unlike 
the minds of others, their minds remaind fully 
engaged in their immediate duty.] 
2.33 On the other hand, if you will not fight this 
righteous battle, then, forsaking your own duty 
and fame, you will incur sin. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.33 Atha, on the other hand; cet, if; tvam, you; na 
karisyasi, will not fight; even imam, this; 
dharmyam, righteous; samgramam, battle, which 
has presented itself as a duty, which is not opposed 
to righteousness, and which is enjoined (by the 
scriptures); tatah, then, because of not undertaking 
that; hitva, forsaking; sva-dharmam, your own 
duty; ca, and; kritim, fame, earned from 
encountering Mahadeva (Lord Siva) and others; 
avapsyasi, you will incur; only papam, sin. 
2.34 People also will speak of your unending 
infamy. And to an honoured person infamy is 
worse than death. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.34 Not only will there be the giving up of your 
duty and fame, but bhutani, people; ca api, also; 
kathayisyanti, will speak; te, of your; avyayam, 
unending, perpetual; akrtim, infamy. Ca, and; 
sambhavitasya, to an honoured person, to a person 
honoured with such epithets as 'virtuous', 'heroic', 
etc.; akirtih, infamy; atiricyate, is worse than; 
maranat, death. The meaning is that, to an
honoured person death is perferable to infamy. 
2.35 The great chariot-riders will think of you as 
having desisted from the fight out of fear; and you 
will into disgrace before them to whom you had 
been estimable. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.35 Moreover, maharathah, the great chariot riders, Duryodhana and others; mamsyante, will 
think; tvam, of you; as uparatam, having desisted; 
ranat, from the fight; not out of compassion, but 
bhayat, out of fear of Karna and others; ca, and ; 
yasyasi laghavam, you will again fall into disgrace 
before them, before Duryodhana and others; 
yesam, to whom; tvam, you; bahumato bhutva, 
had been estimable as endowed with many 
qualities. 
2.36 And your enemies will speak many indecent 
words while denigrating your might. What can be 
more painful than that? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.36 Ca, and besieds; tava, your; ahitah, enemies; 
vadisyanti, will speak; bahun, many, various kinds 
of; avacya-vadan, indecent words, unutterable 
words; nindantah, while denigrating, scorning; 
tava, your; samarthyam, might earned from battles 
against Nivatakavaca and others. Therefore, kim 
nu, what can be; duhkhataram, more painful; tatah, 
than that, than the sorrow arising from being 
scorned? That is to say, there is no greater pain 
than it. 
2.37 Either by being killed you will attain heaven, 
or by winning you will enjoy the earth. Therefore, 
O Arjuna, rise up with determination for fighting. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.37 Again, by undertaking the fight with Karna 
and others, va, either; hatah, by being killed; 
prapsyasi, you will attain; svargam, heaven; or 
jitva, by winning over Karna and other heroes; 
bhoksyase, you will enjoy; mahim, the earth. The 
purport is that in either case you surely stand to 
gain. Since this is so, Kaunteya, O son of Kunti; 
tasmat, therefore; uttistha, rise up; krta-niscayah, 
with determination; yuddhaya, for fighting, i.e. 
with the determination, 'I shall either defeat the 
enemies or shall die.' 
2.38 Treating happiness and sorrow, gain and loss, 
and conquest and defeat with equanimity, then 
engage in battle. Thus you will not incur sin. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.38 As regards that, listen to this advice for you 
then you are engaged in battle considering it to be 
your duty: Krtva, treating; sukha-duhkhe, 
happiness and sorrow; same, with equanimity, i.e. 
without having likes and dislikes; so also treating 
labha-alabhau, gain and loss; jaya-ajayau, conquest 
and defeat, as the same; tatah, then; yuddhaya 
yujyasva, engage in battle. Evam, thus by 
undertaking the fight; na avapsyasi, you will not 
incur; papam, sin. This advice is incidental. [The 
context here is that of the philosophy of the 
supreme Reality. If fighting is enjoined in that 
context, it will amount to accepting combination of 
Knowledge and actions. To avoid this contingency 
the Commentator says, 'incidental'. That is to say, 
although the context is of the supreme Reality, the 
advice to fight is incidental. It is not an injunction 
to combine Knowledge with actions, since fighting 
is here the natural duty of Arjuna as a Ksatriya.]. 
The generally accepted argument for the removal 
of sorrow and delusion has been stated in the 
verses beginning with, 'Even considering your own 
duty' (31), etc., but this has not been presented by 
accepting that as the real intention (of the Lord). 
The real context here (in 2.12 etc.), however, is of 
the realization of the supreme Reality. Now, in 
order to show the distinction between the (two) 
topics dealt with in this scripture, the Lord 
concludes that topic which has been presented 
above (in 2.20 etc.), by saying, 'This (wisdom) has 
been imparted,' etc. For, if the distinction between 
the topics of the scripute be shown here, then the 
instruction relating to the two kinds of adherences 
-- as stated later on in, 'through the Yoga of 
Knowledge for the men of realization; through the 
Yoga of Action for the yogis' (3.3) -- will proceed 
again smoothly, and the hearer also will easily 
comprehend it by keeping in view the distinction 
between the topics. Hence the Lord says: 
2.39 O Partha, this wisdom has been imparted to 
you from the standpoint of Self-realization. But 
listen to this (wisdom) from the standpoint of 
Yoga, endowed with which wisdom you will get 
rid of the bondage of action. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.39 Partha, O son of Prtha (Arjuna); esa, this; 
buddhih, wisdom, the Knowledge which directly 
removes the defect (viz ignorance) that is 
responsible for sorrow, delusion, etc. [Mundane 
existence consists of attraction and repulsion, 
agentship and enjoyership, etc. These are the 
defects, and they arise from ignorance about one's 
Self. Enlightenment is the independent and sole 
cause that removes this ignorance.] constituting 
mundane existence; abhihita, has been imparted; 
te, to you; sankhye, from the standpoint of Self realization, with regard to the discriminating 
knowledge of the supreme Reality. Tu, but; srnu, 
listen; imam, to this wisdom which will be 
imparted presently; yoge, from the spandpoint of 
Yoga, from the standpoint of the means of 
attaining it (Knowledge) -- i.e., in the context of 
Karma-yoga, the performance of rites and duties 
with detachment after destroying the pairs of 
opposites, for the sake of adoring God, as also in 
the context of the practice of spiritual absorption. 
As as inducement, He (the Lord) praises that 
wisdom: Yuktah, endowed; yaya, with which; 
buddhya, wisdom concerning Yoga; O Partha, 
prahasyasi, you will get rid of; karma-bandham, 
the bondage of action -- action is itself the bondage 
described as righteousness and unrighteousness; 
you will get rid of that bondage by the attainment 
of Knowledge through God's grace. This is the 
idea. 
2.40 Here there is no waste of an attempt; nor is 
there (any) harm. Even a little of this righteousness 
saves (one) from great fear. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.40 Moreover, iha, here, in the path to Liberation, 
viz the Yoga of Action (rites and duties); na, there 
is no; abhikrama-nasah, waste of an attempt, of a 
beginning, unlike as in agriculture etc. The 
meaning is that the result of any attempt in the 
case of Yoga is not uncertain. Besides, unlike as in 
medical care, na vidyate, nor is there, nor does 
there arises; any pratyavayah, harm. But, svalpam 
api, even a little; asya, of this; dharmasya, 
righteousness in the form of Yoga (of Action); 
when pracised, trayate, saves (one); mahato 
bhayat, from great fear, of mundance existence 
characterized by death, birth, etc. 
2.41 O scion of the Kuru dynasty, in this there is a 
single, one-pointed conviction. The thoughts of the 
irresolute ones have many branches indeed, and 
are innumerable. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.41 Kuru-nandana, O scion of the Kuru dynasty; 
iha, is this path to Liberation; there is only eka, a 
single; vyavasayatmika, one-pointed; buddhih, 
conviction, which has been spoken of in the Yoga 
of Knowledge and which has the characteristics 
going to be spoken of in (Karma-) yoga. It is 
resolute by nature and annuls the numerous 
branches of the other opposite thoughts, since it 
originates from the right source of knowledge. 
[The right source of knowledge, viz the Vedic texts, 
which are above criticism.] Those again, which are 
the other buddhayah, thoughts; they are bahu sakhah, possessed of numerous branches, i.e. 
possessed of numerous variations. Owing to the 
influence of their many branches the worldly state 
becomes endless, limitless, unceasing, ever growing and extensive. [Endless, because it does 
not cease till the rixe of full enlightenment; 
limitless, because the worldly state, which is an 
effect, springs from an unreal source.] But even the 
worldly state ceases with the cessation of the 
infinite branches of thoughts, under the influence 
of discriminating wisdom arising from the valid 
source of knowledge. (And those thoughts are) hi, 
indeed; anantah, innumerable under every branch. 
Whose thoughts? Avyavasayinam, of the irresolute 
ones, i.e. of those who are devoid of discriminating 
wisdom arising from the right source of 
knowledge. 
2.42-2.43 O son of Prtha, those undiscerning people 
who utter this flowery talk -- which promises birth 
as a result of rites and duties, and is full of various 
special rites meant for the attainment of enjoyment 
and affluence --, they remain engrossed in the 
utterances of the Vedas and declare that nothing 
else exists; their minds are full of desires and they 
have heaven as the goal. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.43 Partha, O son of Prtha; those devoid of one pointed conviction, who pravadanti, utter; imam, 
this; yam puspitam vacam, flowery talk, which is 
going to be stated, which is beautiful like a tree in 
bloom, pleasant to hear, and appears to be 
(meaningful) sentences [Sentences that can be 
called really meaningful are only those that reveal 
the self.-Tr.]; -- who are they? they are --
avipascitah, people who are undiscerning, of poor 
intellect, i.e. non-discriminating; veda-vada-ratah, 
who remain engrossed in the utterances of the 
Vedas, in the Vedic sentences which reveal many 
panegyrics, fruits of action and their means; and 
vadinah, who declare, are apt tosay; iti, that; na 
anyat, nothing else [God, Liberation, etc.]; asti, 
exists, apart from the rites and duties conducive to 
such results as attainment of heaven etc. And they 
are kamatmanah, have their minds full of desires, 
i.e. they are swayed by desires, they are, by nature, 
full of desires; (and) svarga-parah, have heaven as 
the goal. Those who accept heaven (svarga) as the 
supreme (para) human goal, to whom heaven is 
the highest, are svarga-parah. They utter that 
speech (-- this is supplied to construct the sentence 
--) which janma-karma-phala-pradam, promises 
birth as a result of rites and duties. The result 
(phala) of rites and duties (karma) is karma-phala. 
Birth (janma) itself is the karma-phala. That 
(speech) which promises this is janma-karma phala-prada. (This speech) is kriya-visesa-bahulam, 
full of various special rites; bhoga-aisvarya-gatim prati, for the attainment of enjoyment and 
affluence. Special (visesa) rites (kriya) are kriya visesah. The speech that is full (bahula) of these, 
the speech by which that is full (bahula) of these, 
the speech by which these, viz objects such as 
heaven, animals and sons, are revealed plentifully, 
is kriya-visesa-bahula. Bhoga, enjoyment, and 
aisvarya, affluence, are bhoga-aisvarya. Their 
attainment (gatih) is bhoga-aisvarya-gatih. (They 
utter a speech) that is full of the specialized rites, 
prati, meant for that (attainment). The fools who 
utter that speech move in the cycle of 
transmigration. This is the idea. 
2.44 One-pointed conviction does not become 
established in the minds of those who delight in 
enjoyment and affluence, and whose intellects are 
carried away by that (speech). 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.44 And vyavasayatmika, one-pointed; buddhih, 
conviction, with regard to Knowledge or Yoga; na 
vidhiyate, does not become established, i.e. does 
not arise; samadhau, in the minds -- the word 
samadhi being derived in the sese of that into 
which everthing is gathered together for the 
enjoyment of a person --; bhoga-aisvarya prasaktanam, of those who delight in enjoyment 
and wealth, of those who have the hankering that 
only enjoyment as also wealth is to be sought for, 
of those who identify themselves with these; and 
apahrta-cetasam, of those whose intellects are 
carried away, whose discriminating judgement 
becomes covered; taya, by that speech which is full 
of various special rites. 
2.45 O Arjuna, the Vedas [Meaning only the 
portion dealing with rites and duties (karma kanda).] have the three qualities as their object. 
You become free from worldliness, free from the 
pairs of duality, ever-poised in the quality of 
sattva, without (desire for) acquisition and 
protection, and self-collected. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.45 To those who are thus devoid of 
discriminating wisdom, who indulge in pleasure, 
[Here Ast. adds 'yat phalam tad aha, what result 
accrues, that the Lord states:'-Tr.] O Arjuna, vedah, 
the Vedas; traigunya-visayah, have the three 
qualities as their object, have the three gunas, 
[Traigunya means the collection of the three 
qualities, viz sattva (purity), rajas (energy) and 
tamas (darkness); i.e. the collection of virtuous, 
vicious and mixed activities, as also their results. In 
this derivative sense traigunya means the worldly 
life.] i.e. the worldly life, as the object to be 
revealed. But you bhava, become; nistraigunyah, 
free from the three qualities, i.e. be free from 
desires. [There is a seeming conflict between the 
advices to be free from the three qualities and to be 
ever-poised in the quality of sattva. Hence, the 
Commentator takes the phrase nistraigunya to 
mean niskama, free from desires.] (Be) 
nirdvandvah, free from the pairs of duality -- by 
the word dvandva, duality, are meant the 
conflicting pairs [Of heat and cold, etc.] which are 
the causes of happiness and sorrow; you become 
free from them. [From heat, cold, etc. That is, 
forbear them.] You become nitya-sattvasthah, ever poised in the quality of sattva; (and) so also 
niryoga-ksemah, without (desire for) acquisition 
and protection. Yoga means acquisition of what 
one has not, and ksema means the protection of 
what one has. For one who as 'acquisition and 
protection' foremost in his mind, it is difficult to 
seek Liberation. Hence, you be free from 
acquisition and protection. And also be atmavan, 
self-collected, vigilant. This is the advice given to 
you while you are engaged in your own duty. 
[And not from the point of view of seeking 
Liberation.] 
2.46 A Brahmana with realization has that much 
utility in all the Vedas as a man has in a well when 
there is a flood all around. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.46 If there be no need for the infinite results of all 
the rites and duties mentioned in the Vedas, then 
why should they be performed as a dedication to
God? Listen to the answer being given: In the 
world, yavan, whatever; arthah, utility, use, like 
bathing, drinking, etc.; one has udapane, in a well, 
pond and other numerous limited reservoirs; all 
that, indeed, is achieved, i.e. all those needs are 
fulfilled to that very extent; sampluhtodake, when 
there is a flood; sarvatah, all arount. In a similar 
manner, whatever utility, result of action, there is 
sarvesu, in all; the vedesu, Vedas, i.e. in the rites 
and duties mentioned in the Vedas; all that utility 
is achieved, i.e. gets fulfilled; tavan, to that very 
extent; in that result of realization which comes 
brahmanasya, to a Brahmana, a sannyasin; 
vijanatah, who knows the Reality that is the 
supreme Goal -- that result being comparable to 
the flood all around. For there is the Upanisadic 
text, '...so all virtuous deeds performed by people 
get included in this one...who knows what he 
(Raikva) knows...' (Ch. 4.1.4). The Lord also will 
say, 'all actions in their totality culminate in 
Knowledge' (4.33). [The Commentators quotation 
from the Ch. relates to meditation on the qualified 
Brahman. Lest it be concluded that the present 
verse relates to knowledge of the qualified 
Brahman only, he quotes again from the Gita 
toshow that the conclusion holds good in the case 
of knowledge of the absolute Brahman as well.] 
Therefore, before one attains the fitness for 
steadfastness in Knowledge, rites and duties, even 
though they have (limited) utility as that of a well, 
pond, etc., have to be undertaken by one who is fit 
for rites and duties. 
2.47 Your right is for action alone, never for the 
results. Do not become the agent of the results of 
action. May you not have any inclination for 
inaction. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.47 Te, your; adhikarah, right; is karmani eva, for 
action alone, not for steadfastness in Knowledge. 
Even there, when you are engaged in action, you 
have ma kadacana, never, i.e. under no condition 
whatever; a right phalesu, for the results of action -
- may you not have a hankering for the results of 
action. Whenever you have a hankering for the 
fruits of action, you will become the agent of 
acquiring the results of action. Ma, do not; thus 
bhuh, become; karma-phalahetuh, the agent of 
acquiring the results of action. For when one 
engages in action by being impelled by thirst for 
the results of action, then he does become the cause 
for the production of the results of action. Ma, may 
you not; astu, have; sangah, an inclination; 
akarmani, for inaction, thinking, 'If the results of 
work be not desired, what is the need of work 
which involves pain?' 
2.48 By being established in Yoga, O Dhananjaya 
(Arjuna), undertake actions, casting off attachment 
and remaining equipoised in success and failure. 
Equanimity is called Yoga. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.48 If action is not to be undertaken by one who is 
under the impulsion of the fruits of action, how 
then are they to be undertaken? This is being 
stated: Yogasthah, by becoming established in 
Yoga; O Dhanajaya, kuru, undertake; karmani, 
actions, for the sake of God alone; even there, 
tyaktva, casting off; sangam, attachment, in the 
form, 'God will be pleased with me.' ['Undertake 
work for pleasing God, but not for propitiating 
Him to become favourable towards yourself.'] 
Undertake actions bhutva, remaining; samah, 
equipoised; siddhi-asidhyoh, in success and failure 
-- even in the success characterized by the 
attainment of Knowledge that arises from the 
purification of the mind when one performs 
actions without hankering for the results, and in 
the failure that arises from its opposite. [Ignorance, 
arising from the impurity of the mind.] What is 
that Yoga with regard to being established in 
which it is said, 'undertake'? This indeed is that: 
the samatvam, equanimity in success and failure; 
ucyate, is called; yogah, Yoga. 
2.49 O Dhananjaya, indeed, action is quite inferior 
to the yoga of wisdom. Take resort to wisdom. 
Those who thirst for rewards are pitiable. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.49 Then again, O Dhananjaya, as against action 
performed with equanimity of mind for adoring 
God, karma, action undertaken by one longing for 
the results; is, hi, indeed; durena, quite, by far; 
avaram, inferior, very remote; buddhi-yogat, from 
the yoga of wisdom, from actions undertaken with 
equanimity of mind, because it (the former) is the 
cause of birth, death, etc. Since this is so, therefore, 
saranam anviccha, take resort to, seek shelter; 
buddhau, under wisdom, which relates to Yoga, or 
to the Conviction about Reality that arises from its 
(the former's) maturity and which is the cause of 
(achieving) fearlessness. The meaning is that you 
should resort to the knowledge of the supreme 
Goal, because those who under take inferior 
actions, phala-hetavah, who thirst for rewards, 
who are impelled by results; are krpanah, pitiable, 
according to the Sruti, 'He, O Gargi, who departs 
from this world without knowing this Immutable, 
is pitiable' (Br. 3.8.10). [See note under 2.7.-Tr.] 
2.50 Possessed of wisdom, one rejects here both 
virtue and vice. Therefore devote yourself to 
(Karma-) yoga. Yoga is skilfulness in action. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.50 Listen to the result that one possessed of the 
wisdom of equanimity attains by performing one's 
own duties: Buddhi-yuktah, possessed of wisdom, 
possessed of the wisdom of equanimity; since one 
jahati, rejects; iha, here, in this world; ubhe, both; 
sukrta-duskrte, virtue and vice (righteousness and 
unrighteousness), through the purification of the 
mind and acquisition of Knowledge; tasmat, 
therefore; yujyasva, devote yourself; yogaya, to 
(Karma-) yoga, the wisdom of equanimity. For 
Yoga is kausalam, skilfulness; karmasu, in action. 
Skilfulness means the attitude of the skilful, the 
wisdom of equanimity with regard to one's success 
and failure while engaged in actions (karma) --
called one's own duties (sva-dharma) -- with the 
mind dedicated to God. That indeed is skilfulness 
which, through equanimity, makes actions that by 
their very nature bind give up their nature! 
Therefore, be you devoted to the wisdom of 
equanimity. 
2.51 Because, those who are devoted to wisdom, 
(they) becoming men of Enlightenment by giving 
up the fruits produced by actions, reach the state 
beyond evils by having become freed from the 
bondage of birth. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.51 The words 'phalam tyaktva, by giving up the 
fruits' are connected with the remote word 
'karmajam, produced by actions'. Hi, because; 
[Because, when actions are performed with an 
attitude of equanimity, it leads to becoming freed 
from sin etc. Therefore, by stages, it becomes the 
cause of Liberation as well.] buddhi-yuktah, those 
who are devoted to wisdom, who are imbued with 
the wisdom of equanimity; (they) becoming 
manisinah, men of Enlightenment; tyaktva, by 
giving up; phalam, the fruit, the acquisition of 
desirable and undesriable bodies; [Desirable: the 
bodies of gods and others; undesirable: the bodies 
of animals etc.] karmajam, produced by actions; 
gacchanti, reach; padam, the state, the supreme 
state of Visnu, called Liberation; anamayam, 
beyond evils, i.e. beyond all evils; by having 
become janma-bandha-vinirmuktah, freed from the 
bondage of birth -- birth (janma) itself is a bondage 
(bandha); becoming freed from that --, even while 
living. Or: -- Since it (buddhi) has been mentioned 
as the direct cause of the elimination of 
righteousness and unrighteousness, and so on, 
therefore what has been presented (in the three 
verses) beginning with, 'O Dhananjaya,...to the 
yoga of wisdom' (49), is enlightenment itself, which 
consists in the realization of the supreme Goal, 
which is comparable to a flood all around, and 
which arises from the purification of the mind as a 
result of Karma-yoga. [In the first portion of the 
Commentary buddhi has been taken to mean 
samattva buddhi (wisdom of equanimity); the 
alternative meaning of buddhi has been taken as 
'enlightenment'. So, action is to be performed by 
taking the help of the 'wisdom about the supreme 
Reality' which has been chosen as one's Goal.] 
2.52 When your mind will go beyond the turbidity 
of delusion, then you will acquire dispassion for 
what has to be heard and what has been heard. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.52 When is attained that wisdom which arises 
from the purification of the mind brought about by 
the pursuit of (karma-) yoga? This is being stated: 
Yada, when, [Yada: when maturity of 
discrimination is attained.] at the time when; te, 
your; buddhih, mind; vyatitarisyati, will go 
beyond, cross over; moha-kalilam, the turbidity of 
delusion, the dirt in the form of delusion, in the 
form of non-discrimination, which, after 
confounding one's understanding about the 
distinction between the Self and the not-Self, 
impels the mind towards objects -- that is to say, 
when your mind will attain the state of purity; 
tada, then, [Tada: then, when the mind, becoming 
purified, leads to the rise of discrimination, which 
in turn matures into detachment.] at that time; 
gantasi, you will acquire; nirvedam, despassion; 
for srotavyasya, what has to be heard; ca, and; 
srutasya, what has been heard. The idea implied is 
that, at that time what has to be heard and what 
has been heard [What has to be heard...has been 
heard, i.e. the scriptures other than those relating 
to Self-knowledge. When discrimination referred 
to above gets matured, then the fruitlessness of all 
things other than Self-knowledge becomes 
apparent.] becomes fruitless. 
2.53 When your mind that has become bewildered 
by hearing [S. takes the word sruti in the sense of 
the Vedas.-Tr.] will become unshakable and 
steadfast in the Self, then you will attain Yoga that 
arises from discrimination. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.53 If it be asked, 'By becoming possessed of the 
wisdom arising from the discrimination about the 
Self after overcoming the turbidity of delusion, 
when shall I attain the yoga of the supreme Reality 
which is the fruit that results from Karma-yoga?', 
then listen to that; Yada, when at the time when; te, 
your; buddhih, mind; that has become sruti-vi pratipanna, bewildered, tossed about, by hearing 
(the Vedas) that reveal the diverse ends, means, 
and (their) relationship, i.e. are filled with 
divergent ideas; sthasyati, will become; niscala, 
unshakable, free from the trubulence in the form of 
distractions; and acala, steadfast, that is to say, free 
from doubt even in that (unshakable) state; 
samadhau, in samadhi, that is to say, in the Self --
samadhi being derived in the sense of that in 
which the mind is fixed; tada, then, at that time; 
avapsyasi, you will attain; yogam, Yoga, the 
enlightenment, Self-absorption, that arises from 
discrimination. Having got an occasion for inquiry, 
Arjuna, with a view to knowing the characteristics 
of one who has the realization of the Self, [By the 
word samadhi is meant the enlightenment arising 
from discrimination, which has been spoken of in 
the commentary on the previous verse. The 
steadfastness which the monks have in that 
enlightenment is called steadfastness in 
Knowledge. Or the phrase may mean, 'the 
enlightenment achieved through meditation on the 
Self', i.e. the realization of the supreme Goal.] 
asked: 
2.54 Arjuna said -- O kesava, what is the 
description of a man of steady wisdom who is Self absorbed? How does the man of steady wisdom 
speak? How does he sit? How does he move 
about? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.54 O Kesava, ka, what; is the bhasa, description, 
the language (for the description) -- how is he 
described by others --; sthita-prajnasya, of a man of 
steady wisdom, of one whose realization, 'I am the 
supreme Brahman', remains steady; samadhi sthasya, of one who is Self-absorbed? Or kim, how; 
does the sthitadhih, dhih, man of steady wisdom; 
himself probhaseta, speak? How does he asita, sit? 
How does he vrajeta, move about? That is to say, of 
what kind is his sitting or moving? Through this 
verse Arjuna asks for a description of the man of 
steady wisdom. 
2.55 The Blessed said -- O Partha, when one fully 
renounces all the desires that have entered the 
mind, and remains satisfied in the Self alone by the 
Self, then he is called a man of steady wisdom. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.55 In the verses beginning from, 'When one fully 
renounces...', and ending with the completion the 
Chapter, instruction about the characteristics of the 
man of steady wisdom and the disciplines (he had 
to pass through) is being given both for the one 
who has, indeed, applied himself to steadfastness 
in the Yoga of Knowledge after having renounced 
rites and duties from the very beginning [Even 
while he is in the stage of celibacy.], and for the one 
who has (applied himself to this after having 
passed) through the path of Karma-yoga. For in all 
the scriptures without exception, dealing, with 
spirituality, whatever are the characteristics of the 
man of realization are themselves presented as the 
disciplines for an aspirant, because these 
(characteristics) are the result of effort. And those 
that are the disciplines requiring effort, they 
become the characteristics (of the man of 
realization). [There are two kinds of sannyasa --
vidvat (renunciation that naturally follows 
Realization), and vividisa, formal renunciation for 
undertaking the disciplines which lead to that 
Realization. According to A.G. the characteristics 
presented in this and the following verses describe 
not only the vidvat-sannyasin, but are also meant 
as disciplines for the vividisa-sannyasin.-Tr.] O 
Partha, yada, when, at the time when; prajahati, 
one fully renounces; sarvan, all; the kaman, desires, 
varieties of desires; manogatan, that have entered 
the mind, entered into the heart --. If all desires are 
renounced while the need for maintaining the 
body persists, then, in the absence of anything to 
bring satisfaction, there may arise the possibility of 
one's behaving like lunatics or drunkards. [A 
lunatic is one who has lost his power of 
discrimination, and a drunkard is one who has that 
power but ignores it.] Hence it is said: Tustah, 
remains satisfied; atmani eva, in the Self alone, in 
the very nature of the inmost Self; atmana, by the 
Self which is his own -- indifferent to external 
gains, and satiated with everything else on account 
of having attained the nector of realization of the 
supreme Goal; tada, then; ucyate, he is called; 
sthita-prajnah, a man of steady wisdom, a man of 
realization, one whose wisdom, arising from the 
discrimination between the Self and the not-Self, is 
stable. The idea is that the man of steady wisdom is 
a monk, who has renounced the desire for 
progeny, wealth and the worlds, and who delights 
in the Self and disports in the Self. 
2.56 That monk is called a man of steady wisdom 
when his mind is unperturbed in sorrow, he is free 
from longing for delights, and has gone beyond 
attachment, fear and anger. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.56 Moreover, that munih, monk [Sankaracarya 
identifies the monk with the man of realization.] 
ucyate, is then called; sthita-dhih, a man of steady 
wisdom; when anudvignamanah, his mind is 
unperturbed; duhkhesu, in sorrow -- when his 
mind remains unperturbed by the sorrows that 
may come on the physical or other planes [Fever, 
headache, etc. are physical (adhyatmika) sorrows; 
sorrows caused by tigers, snakes, etc. are 
environmental (adhibhautika) sorrows; those 
caused by cyclones, floods, etc. are super-natural 
(adhidaivika). Similarly, delights also may be 
experienced on the three planes.] --; so also, when 
he is vigata-sprhah, free from longing; sukhesu, for 
delights -- when he, unlike fire which flares up 
when fed with fuel etc., has no longing for delights 
when they come to him --; and vita-raga-bhaya krodhah, has gone beyond attachment, fear and 
anger. 
2.57 The wisdom of that person remains 
established who has not attachment for anything 
anywhere, who neither welcomes nor rejects 
anything whatever good or bad when he comes 
across it. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.57 Further, prajna, the wisdom; tasya, of that 
person, fo that sannyasin; pratisthita, remains 
established; yah, who; anabhi-snehah, has no 
attachment for; sarvatra, anything anywhere, even 
for body, life, etc.; who na abhinanadati, neither 
welcomes; na dvesti, nor rejects; tat tat, anything 
whatever; subha-asubham, good or bad; propya, 
when he comes across it, i.e. who does not rejoice 
on meeting with the good, nor reject the bad on 
meeting with it. Of such a person, who is thus free 
from elation or dejection, the wisdom arising from 
discrimination remains established. 
2.58 And when this one fully withdraws the senses 
from the objects of the senses, as a tortoise wholly 
(withdraws) the limbs, then his wisdom remains 
established. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.58 And besides, yada, when; ayam, this one, the 
sannyasin practising steadfastness in Knowledge; 
samharate, fully withdraws; ['Fully' suggests 
absolute firmness in withdrawal, and 'withdraws' 
suggests full control over the organs] indriyani, the 
senses; indriya-arthebhyah, from all the objects of 
the senses; iva, as; kurmah, a tortoise; sarvasah, 
wholly (withdraws); angani, its limbs, from all 
sides out of fear; -- when the man engaged in
steadfastness to Knowledge withdraws thus, then 
tasya, his; prajna, wisdom; pratisthita, remains 
established -- (the meaning of this portion has 
already been explained). As to that, [That is , so far 
as the phenomenal world is concerned.] the organs 
of a sick person, too, cease to be active when the 
refrains from sense-objects; they get fully 
withdrawn like the limbs of a tortoise. but not so 
the hankering for those objects. How that 
(hankering) gets completely withdrawn is being 
stated: 
2.59 The objects recede from an abstinent man, 
with the exception of the taste (for them). Even the 
taste of this person falls away after realization the 
Absolute. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.59 Although visayah, the objects, (i.e.) the organs, 
figuratively implied and expressed by the word 
'objects', or, the objects themselves; vinivartante, 
recede; niraharasya dehinah, from an abstinent 
man, from an embodied being, even from a fool 
who engages in painful austerity and abstains from 
objects; (still, they do so) rasavarjam, with the 
exception of the taste (for them), with the exception 
of the hankering that one has for objects. The word 
rasa is well known as referring to the sense of taste 
(hankering), as in such expressions as, 'sva-rasena 
pravrttah, induced by his own taste (i.e. willingly)', 
'rasikah, a man of tastes', 'rasajnah, a connoisseur 
(of tastes)', etc. Api, even that; rasah, taste of the 
nature of subtle attachment; asya, of this person, of 
the sannyasin; nivartate, falls away, i.e. his 
objective perception becomes seedless; when 
drstva, after attaining; param, the Absolute, the 
Reality which is the supreme Goal, Brahman, he 
continues in life with the realization, 'I verily am 
That (Brahman).' In the absence of full realization 
there can be no eradication of the 'hankering'. The 
idea conveyed is that, one should therefore 
stabilize one's wisdom which is characterized by 
full realization. [If it be held that attachment cannot 
be eliminated without the knowledge of Brahman, 
and at the same time that the knowledge of 
Brahman cannot arise until attachment is 
eradicated, then we get involved in a vicious circle. 
In answer it is said that gross attachments are 
eliminated through discrimination which restrains 
the senses from being overpowered by objects. 
And the full Knowledge arising thereof eliminates 
the subtle inclinations as well. Hence there is no 
vicious circle involved.] Since the organs have to be 
first brought under his own control by one who 
desires to establish firmly the wisdom which is 
characterized by full realization, therefore the Lord 
speaks of the evil that arises from not keeping 
them under control: 
2.60 For, O son of Kunti, the turbulent organs 
violently snatch away the mind of an intelligent 
person, even while he is striving diligently. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.60 Hi, for; kaunteya, O son of Kunti; pramathini, 
the turbulent; indriyani, organs; prasabham, 
violently; haranti, snatch away; manah, the mind; 
vipascitah, of an intelligent; purusasya, person; api, 
even; yatatah, while he is striving diligently 
[Repeatedly being mindful of the evils that arise 
from sense-objects.] -- (or,) the words purusasya 
vipascitah (of an intelligent person) are to be 
connected with the remote word api (even). [The 
Commentator says that api may be construed 
either with yatatah or with vipascitah purusasya.-
Tr.] Indeed, the organs confound a person who is 
inclined towards objects, and after confounding 
him, violently carry away his mind endowed with 
discriminating knoweldge, even when he is aware 
of this. Since this is so, therefore, 
2.61 Controlling all of them, one should remain 
concentrated on Me as the supreme. For, the 
wisdom of one whose organs are under control 
becomes steadfast. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.61 Samyamya, controlling, having subdued; 
sarvani, all; tani, of them; asita, one should remain; 
yuktah, concentrated; mat-parah, on Me as the 
supreme -- he to whom I, Vasudeva, the inmost 
Self of all, am the supreme (parah) is mat-parah. 
The idea is, he should remain (concentrated) 
thinking, 'I am not different from Him.' Hi, for; the 
prajna, wisdom; tasya, of one, of the sannyasin 
remaining thus concentrated; yasya, whose; 
indriyani, organs; are vase, under control, by dint 
of practice; [The organs come under control either 
by constantly thinking of oneself as non-different 
from the Self, or by constantly being mindful of the 
evils that result from objects.] pratisthita, becomes 
steadfast. Now, then, is being stated this 
[This:what is described in the following two verses, 
and is also a matter of common experience.] root, 
cause of all the evils that beset one who is the verge 
of being overwhelmed: 
2.62-2.63 In the case of a person who dwells on 
objects, there arises attachment for them. From 
attachment grows hankering, from hankering 
springs anger. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.62 Pumsah, in the case of a person; dhyayatah, 
who dwells on, thinks of; visayan, the objects, the 
specialities [Specialities: The charms imagined in 
them.] of the objects such as sound etc.; upajayate, 
there arises; sangah, attachment, fondness, love; 
tesu, for them, for those objects. Sangat, from 
attachment, from love; sanjayate, grows; kamah, 
hankering, thirst. When that is obstructed from any 
quarter, kamat, from hankering; abhijayate, 
springs; krodhah, anger. Krodhat, from anger; 
bhavati, follows; sammohah, delusion, absence of 
discrimination with regard to what should or 
should not be done. For, an angry man, becoming 
deluded, abuses even a teacher. Sammohat, from 
delusion; (comes) smrti-vibhramah, failure of 
memory originating from the impressions acquired 
from the instructions of the scriptures and teachers. 
When there is an occasion for memory to rise, it 
does not occur. Smrti-bhramsat, from that failure of 
memory; (results) buddhi-nasah, loss of 
understanding. The unfitness of the mind to 
discriminate between what should or should not be 
done is called loss of understanding. Buddhi-nasat, 
from the loss of understanding; pranasyati, he 
perishes. Indeed, a man continues tobe himself so 
long as his mind remains fit to distinguish between 
what he ought to and ought not do. When it 
becomes unfit, a man is verily ruined. Therefore, 
when his internal organ, his understanding, is 
destroyed, a man is ruined, i.e. he becomes unfit 
for the human Goal. Thinking of objects has been 
said to be the root of all evils. After that, this which 
is the cause of Liberation is being now stated: [If 
even the memory of objects be a source of evil, then 
their enjoyment is more so. Hence, a sannyasin 
seeking Liberation cannot avoid this evil, since he 
has to move about for food which is necessary for 
the maintenance of his body. The present verse is 
an answer to this apprehension.] 
2.63 From anger follows delusion; from delusion, 
failure of memory; from failure of memory, the loss 
of understanding; from the loss of understanding, 
he perishes. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.63 Pumsah, in the case of a person; dhyayatah, 
who dwells on, thinks of; visayan, the objects, the 
specialities [Specialities: The charms imagined in 
them.] of the objects such as sound etc.; upajayate, 
there arises; sangah, attachment, fondness, love; 
tesu, for them, for those objects. Sangat, from 
attachment, from love; sanjayate, grows; kamah, 
hankering, thirst. When that is obstructed from any 
quarter, kamat, from hankering; abhijayate, 
springs; krodhah, anger. Krodhat, from anger; 
bhavati, follows; sammohah, delusion, absence of 
discrimination with regard to what should or 
should not be done. For, an angry man, becoming 
deluded, abuses even a teacher. Sammohat, from 
delusion; (comes) smrti-vibhramah, failure of 
memory originating from the impressions acquired 
from the instructions of the scriptures and teachers. 
When there is an occasion for memory to rise, it 
does not occur. Smrti-bhramsat, from that failure of 
memory; (results) buddhi-nasah, loss of 
understanding. The unfitness of the mind to 
discriminate between what should or should not be 
done is called loss of understanding. Buddhi-nasat, 
from the loss of understanding; pranasyati, he 
perishes. Indeed, a man continues tobe himself so 
long as his mind remains fit to distinguish between 
what he ought to and ought not do. When it 
becomes unfit, a man is verily ruined. Therefore, 
when his internal organ, his understanding, is 
destroyed, a man is ruined, i.e. he becomes unfit 
for the human Goal. Thinking of objects has been 
said to be the root of all evils. After that, this which 
is the cause of Liberation is being now stated: [If 
even the memory of objects be a source of evil, then 
their enjoyment is more so. Hence, a sannyasin 
seeking Liberation cannot avoid this evil, since he 
has to move about for food which is necessary for 
the maintenance of his body. The present verse is 
an answer to this apprehension.] 
2.64 But by perceiving objects with the organs that 
are free from attraction and repulsion, and are 
under his own control, the self-controlled man 
attains serenity. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.64 Certainly the functions of the organs are 
naturally preceded by attraction and repulsion. 
This being so, caran, by perceiving; visayan, 
objects, which are unavoidable; indriyaih, with the 
organs such as ears etc.; raga-dvesa-viyuktaih, that 
are free from those attraction and repulsion; and 
are atma-vasyaih, under his own control; vidheya atma, [A.G. takes atma-vasyaih in the sense of 
'(with the organs) under the control of the mind'. 
He then argues that it the mind be not under 
control, there can be no real control, over the 
organs. Hence the text uses the second expression, 
'vidheyatma, whose mind can be subdued at will'. 
Here atma is used in the sense of the mind, 
according to the Commentator himself.] the self controlled man, whose mind can be subdued at 
will, a seeker after Liberation; adhigacchati, attains; 
prasadam, serenity, self-poise. What happens 
when there is serenity? This is being answered: 
2.65 When there is serenity, there follows 
eradication of all his sorrows, because the wisdom 
of one who has a serene mind soon becomes firmly 
established. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.65 Prasade, when there is serenity; upajayate, 
there follows; hanih, eradication; asya sarva duhkhanam, of all his, the sannyasin's, sorrow on 
the physical and other planes. Moreover, (this is 
so) hi, because; buddhih, the wisdom; prasanna cetasah, of one who has a serene mind, of one 
whose mind is poised in the Self; asu, soon; pari avatisthate, becomes firmly established; remains 
steady (avatisthate) totally (pari), like the sky, i.e. it 
becomes unmoving in its very nature as the Self. 
The meaning of the sentence is this: Since a person 
with such a poised mind and well-established 
wisdom attains fulfilment, therefore a man of 
concentration [A man who is free whom slavery to 
objects of the senses.] ought to deal with the 
indispensable and scripturally non-forbidden 
objects through his senses that are free from love 
and hatred. That same serenity is being eulogized: 
2.66 For the unsteady there is no wisdom, and 
there is no meditation for the unsteady man. And 
for an unmeditative man there is no peace. How 
can there be happiness for one without peace? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.66 Ayuktasya, for the unsteady, for one who does 
not have a concentrated mind; na asti, there is no, 
i.e. there does not arise; buddhih, wisdom, with 
regard to the nature of the Self; ca, and; there is no 
bhavana, meditation, earnest longing [Longing to 
have a continuous remembrance of the knowledge 
of Brahman which arises in the mind from hearing 
the great Upanisadic sayings (maha-vakyas).] for 
the knowledge of the Self; ayuktasya, for an 
unsteady man. And similarly, abhavayatah, for an 
unmeditative man, who does not ardently desire 
the knowledge of the Self; there is no santih, peace, 
restraint of the senses. Kutah, how can there be; 
sukham, happiness; asantasya, for one without 
peace? That indeed is happiness which consists in 
the freedom of the senses from the thirst for 
enjoyment of objects; not the thirst for objects --
that is misery to be sure. The implication is that, so 
long as thirst persists, there is no possibility of 
even an iota of happiness! It is being stated why a 
man without concentration does not possess 
wisdom: 
2.67 For, the mind which follows in the wake of the 
wandering senses, that (mind) carries away his 
wisdom like the mind (diverting) a boat on the 
waters. 
2.67 Hi, for; yat manah, the mind which; anu vidhiyate, follows in the wake of; caratam, the 
wandering; indriyani, senses that are tending 
towards their respective objects; tat, that, the mind 
engaged in thinking [Perceiving objects like sound 
etc. in their respective varieties.] of the objects of 
the senses; harati, carries away, destroys; asya, his, 
the sannyasin's; prajnam, wisdom born from the 
discrimination between the Self and the not-Self. 
How? Iva, like; vayuh, the wind; diverting a 
navam, boat; ambhasi, on the waters. As wind, by 
diverting a boat on the waters from its intended 
course, drives it along a wrong course, similarly 
the mind, by diverting the wisdom from the 
pursuit of the Self, makes it engage in objects. After 
having stated variously the reasons for the idea 
conveyed through the verse, 'For, O son of Kunti,' 
etc. (60), and having established that very idea, the 
Lord concludes thus: 
2.68 Therefore, O mighty-armed one, this wisdom 
becomes established whose organs in all their 
varieties are withdrawn from their objects. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.68 Since the evils arising from the activities of the 
organs have been described, tasmat, therefore; 
mahabaho, O mighty-armed one; tasya, his, the 
sannyasin's; prajna, wisdom; pratisthita, becomes 
established; yasya, whose; indriyani, organs; 
sarvasah, in all their varieties, differentiated as 
mind etc.; nigrhitani, are withdrawn; indriya arthebhyah, from their objects such as sound etc. In 
the case of a man of steady wisdom in whom has 
arisen discriminating knowledge, those which are 
these ordinary and Vedic dealings cease on the 
eradication of ignorance, they being effects of 
ignorance. And ignorance ceases because it is 
opposed to Knowledge. For clarifying this idea, the 
Lord says: 
2.69 The self-restrained man keeps awake during 
that which is night for all creatures. That during 
which creatures keep awake, it is night to the 
seeing sage. 
2.69 ya, that which; sarva-bhutanam, for all 
creatures; is nisa, night -- which being darkness 
(tamah) by nature, obliterates distinctions among 
all things; what is that? that is the Reality which is 
the supreme Goal, accessible to the man of steady 
wisdom. As that which verily appears as day to the 
nocturnal creatures is night for others, similarly the 
Reality wich is the supreme Goal appears to be 
night, as it were, to all unenlightened beings who 
are comparable to the nocturnal creatures, because 
It is beyond the range of vision of those who are 
devoid of that wisdom. Samyami, the self restrained man, whose organs are under control, 
i.e. the yogi [The man of realization.] who has 
arisen from the sleep of ignorance; jagarti, keeps 
awake; tasyam, in that (night) characterized as the 
Reality, the supreme Goal. That night of ignorance, 
characterized by the distinctions of subjects and 
objects, yasyam in which; bhutani, the creatures, 
who are really asleep; are said to be jagrati, 
keeping awake, in which night they are like 
dreamers in sleep; sa nisa, it is night; pasyatah, to 
the seeing; muneh, sage, who perceives the Reality 
that is the supreme Goal, because that (night) is 
ignorance by nature. Therefore, rites and duties are 
enjoined only during the state of ignorance, not in 
the state of enlightenment. For, when Knowledge 
dawns, ignorance becomes eradicated like the 
darkness of night after sun-rise. [It may be argued 
that even after illumination the phenomenal world, 
though it is known to be false, will continue to be 
perceived because of the persistence of past 
impressions; therefore there is scope for the 
validity of the scriptural injunctions even in the 
case of an illumined soul. The answer is that there 
will be no scope for the injunctions, because the 
man of realization will then have no ardent leaning 
towards this differentiated phenomenal world 
which makes an injunction relevant.] Before the 
rise of Knowledge, ignorance, accepted as a valid 
means of knowledge and presenting itself in the 
different forms of actions, means and results, 
becomes the cause of all rites and duties. It cannot 
reasonably become the source of rites and duties
(after Realization) when it is understood as an 
invalid means of knowledge. For an agent becomes 
engaged in actions when he has the idea, 'Actions 
have been enjoined as a duty for me by the Vedas, 
which are a valid means of knowledge'; but not 
when he understands that 'all this is mere 
ignorance, like the night'. Again, the man to whom 
has come the Knowledge that all these differences 
in their totality are mere ignorance like the night, 
to that man who has realized the Self, there is 
eligibility only for renouncing all actions, not for 
engaging in actions. In accordance with this the 
Lord will show in the verse, 'Those who have their 
intellect absorbed in That, whose Self is That' (5.17) 
etc., that he has competence only for steadfastness 
in Knowledge. Objection: May it not be argued 
that, there will be no reason for being engaged 
even in that (steadfastness in Knowledge) if there 
be no valid means of knowledge [Vedic 
injunctions.] to impel one to that. [Because, without 
an injunction nobody would engage in a duty, 
much less in steadfastness to Knowledge.] Answer: 
No, since 'knowledge of the Self' relates to one's 
own Self. Indeed, by the very fact that It is the Self, 
and since the validity of all the means of 
knowledge culminates in It, [The validity of all the 
means of knowledge holds good only so long as 
the knowledge of the Self has not arisen.] therefore 
the Self does not depend on an injunction to impel 
It towards Itself. [Does the injunction relate to the 
knowledge of the Self. or to the Self Itself? The first 
alternative is untenable because a valid means of 
knowledge reveals its objects even without an 
injunction. The second alternative also is untenable 
because the Self is self-revealing, whereas an 
injunction is possible in the case of something yet
to be achieved. And one's own Self is not an object 
of that kind.] Surely, after the realization of the true 
nature of the Self, there is no scope again for any 
means to, or end of, knowledge. The last valid 
means of (Self-) knowledge eradicates the 
possibility of the Self's becoming a perceiver. And 
even as it eradicates, it loses its own 
authoritativeness, in the same way as the means of 
knowledge which is valid in dream becomes 
unauthoritative during the waking state. In the 
world, too, after the preception of an abject, the 
valid means of that perception is not seen to be a 
cause impelling the knower (to any action with 
regard to that object). Hence, it is established that, 
for an knower of the Self, there remains no 
eligibility for rites and duties. The attainment of 
Liberation is only for the sannyasin [Liberation is 
attained only by one who, after acquiring an 
intellectual knowledge of the Self in a general way, 
is endowed with discrimination and detachment, 
has arisen above all desires, has become a monk in 
the primary sense, and has directly realized the 
Self by going through the process of sravana 
(understanding of Upanisadic texts about the Self), 
etc.], the man of enlightenment, who has 
renounced all desires and is a man of steady 
wisdom; but not for him who has not renounced 
and is desirious of the objects (of the senses). Such 
being the case, with a view to establishing this with 
the help of an illustration, the Lord says: 
2.70 That man attains peace into whom all desires 
enter in the same way as the waters flow into a sea 
that remains unchanged (even) when being filled 
up from all sides. Not so one who is desirous of 
objects. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.70 Sah, that man; apnoti, attains; santim, peace 
Liberation; yam, into whom, into which person; 
sarve, all; kamah, desires, all forms of wishes; 
pravisanti, enter, from all directions, like waters 
entering into a sea, without overwhelming him 
even in the presence of objects; they vanish in the 
Self, they do not bring It under their own influence, 
tadvat, in the same way; yadvat, as; apah, waters, 
coming from all sides; pravisanti, flow into; 
samudram, a sea; that remains acala-pratistham, 
unchanged, that continues to be its own self, 
without any change; apuryamanam, (even) when 
filled up from all sides with water. Na, not so the 
other; who is kama-kami, desirous of objects. Kama 
means objects which are sought after. He who is 
given to desire them is kama-kami. The idea 
implied is that he never attains (peace). Since this is 
so, therefore. 
2.71 That man attains peace who, after rejecting all 
desires, moves about free from hankering, without 
the idea of ('me' and) 'mine', and devoid of pride. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.71 Sah puman, that man who has become thus, 
the sannyasin, the man of steady wisdom, the 
knower of Brahman; adhi-gacchati, attains; santim, 
peace, called Nirvana, consisting in the cessation of 
all the sorrows of mundane existence, i.e. he 
becomes one with Brahman; yah, who; vihaya, 
after rejecting; sarvan, all; kaman, desires, without 
a trace, fully; carati, moves about, i.e. wanders 
about, making efforts only for maintaining the 
body; nihsprhah, free from hankering, becoming 
free from any longing even for the maintenance of 
the body; nirmamah, without the idea of ('me' and) 
'mine', without the deeprooted idea of 'mine' even 
when accepting something needed merely for the 
upkeep of the body; and nir-ahankarah, devoid of 
pride, i.e. free from self esteem owing to learning 
etc. This steadfastness in Knowledge, which is 
such, is being praised: 
2.72 O Partha, this is the state of being established 
in Brahman. One does not become deluded after 
attaining this. One attains identification with 
Brahman by being established in this state even in 
the closing years of one's life. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
2.72 O Partha, esa, this, the aforesaid; is 
brahmisthitih, the state of being established in 
Brahman, i.e. continuing (in life) in indentification 
with Brahman, after renouncing all actions. Na 
vimuhyati, one does not become deluded; prapya, 
after attaining ; enam, this Rcchati, one attains; 
brahma-nirvanam, identification with Brahman, 
Liberation; sthitva, by being established; asyam, in 
this, in the state of Brahman-hood as described; 
api, even; anta-kale, in the closing years of one's 
life. What need it be said that, one who remains 
established only in Brahman during the whole life, 
after having espoused monasticism even from the 
stage of celibacy, attains indetification with 
Brahman! 
3.1 Arjuna said -- O Janardana (krsna), if it be Your 
opinion that wisdom is superior to action, why 
they do you urge me to horrible aciton, O Kesava ? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.1 O Janardana, cet, if it be; te, Your; mata, 
opinion, intention; that buddhih, Wisdom; jyayasi, 
is superior; karmanah, to action-. If the 
combination of Wisdom and action be intended (by 
the Lord), then the means to Liberation is only one. 
[The path combining Wisdom and action.] In that 
case, Arjuna would have done something illogical 
in separating Wisdom from action by saying that 
Wisdom is superior to action. For, that (Wisdom or 
action, which is a constituent of the combination) 
cannot be greater than that (Combination, even) 
from the point of view of the result. [Since what is 
intended is a combination, therefore, the separation 
of Knowledge from action, from the point of view 
of the result, is not justifiable. When Knowledge 
and action are considered to form together a single 
means to Liberation, in that case each of them 
cannot be considered separately as producing its 
own distinct result. Arjuna's question can be 
justified only if this separation were possible.] 
Similarly, what Arjuna said by way of censuring 
the Lord, as it were, in, 'It has been stated by the 
Lord that Wisdom is superior to action, and He 
exhorts me saying, "Undertake action," which is a 
source of evil! What may be the reason for this?', 
and also in, 'Tatkim, why then, O Kesava; 
niyojayasi, do You urge; mam, me; to ghore, 
horrible, cruel; karmani, action; involving injury?'-
that (censure) also does not become reasonable. On 
the other hand, [If the opponent's view be that 
Knowledge is to be combined with rites and duties 
sanctioned by the Vedas and the Smrtis in the case 
of the householders only, whereas for others those 
sanctioned by the Smrtis alone are to be combined 
with Knowledge..., then...] if it be supposed that 
the combination (of Knowledge) with action 
sanctioned only by the Smrtis has been enjoined for 
all by the Lord, and Arjuna also comprehended 
(accordingly), then, how can the statement, 'Why 
then do you urge me to horrible action', be 
rational? Besides, 
3.2 You bewilder my understanding, as it were, by 
a seemingly conflicting statement! Tell me for 
certain one of these by which I may attain the 
highest Good. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.2 'Though the Lord speaks lucidly, still, to me 
who am of a dull understanding, the Lord's 
utterance appears to be conflicting.' 'Mohayasi, 
You bewilder; me, any; buddhim, understanding; 
iva, as it were; vyamisrena iva, by that seemingly 
conflicting; vakyena, statement! You have surely 
undertaken to dispel the confusion of my 
understanding; but why do You bewildered (it)? 
Hence I say, "You bewildered my understanding, 
as it were."' However, if You [In some readings, 
'tvam tu, however, you', is substituted by 'tatra, as 
to that'.-Tr.] think that it is impossible for a single 
person to pursue both Knowledge and action, 
which can be undertaken (only) by different 
persons then, that being the case, vada, tell me; 
niscitya, for certain; tadekam, one of these, either 
Knowledge or action: "This indeed is fit for Arjuna, 
according to his understanding, strength and 
situation"; yena, by which, by one of either 
Knowledge or action; aham, I; apnuyam, may 
attain; sreyah, the highest Good.' Even if 
Knowledge had been spoken of at all by the Lord 
as being subsidiary to steadfastness in action, how 
then could there be the desire in Arjuna to know of 
only one of them, as expressed in 'Tell me one of 
these two?' Certainly the Lord did not say, 'I shall 
speak of only one among Knowledge and action, 
but surely not of both', owing to which, Arjuna, 
considering it impossible for himself to acquire 
both, should have prayed for one only! The answer 
was in accordance witht the question: 
3.3 The Blessed Lord said -- O unblemished one, 
two kinds of steadfastness in this world were 
spoken of by Me in the days of yore-through the 
Yoga of Knowledge for the men of realization; 
through the Yoga of Action for the yogis. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.3 Anagha, O unblemished one, O sinless one; 
[This word of address suggests that Arjuna is 
qualified to receive the Lord's instruction.] 
dvividha, two kinds of ; nistha, steadfastness, 
persistence in what is undertaken; asmin loke, in 
this world, for the people of the three castes who 
are qualified for following the scriptures; prokta, 
were spoken of; maya, by Me, the omniscient God, 
who had revealed for them the traditional 
teachings of the Vedas, which are the means of 
securing prosperity and the highest Goal; pura, in 
the days of yore, in the beginning the creation, 
after having brought into being the creatures. Now 
then, which is that steadfastness of two kinds? In 
answer the Lord says: The steadfastness 
jnanayogena, through the Yoga of Knowledge Knowledge itself being the Yoga [Here jnana, 
Knowledge, refers to the knowledge of the 
supreme Reality, and Yoga is used in the derivative 
sense of 'that (Knowledge) through which one gets 
united with Brahman'.]-; had been stated 
sankhyanam, for the men of realization-those 
possessed of the Knowledge arising from the 
discrimination with regard to the Self and the not Self, those who have espoused monasticism from 
the stage of Celibacy; itself, those to whom the 
entity presented by the Vedantic knowledge has 
become fully ascertained (see Mu. 3.2.6)-,the 
monks who are known as the parama-hamsas, 
those who are established in Brahman alone. And 
the steadfastness karma-yogena, through the Yoga 
of Action-action itself being the Yoga [Yoga here 
means 'that through which one gets united with, 
comes to have, prosperity', i.e. such actions as go 
by the name of righteousness and are prescribed by 
the scriptures.] had been stated yoginam, for the 
yogis, the men of action (rites and duties). This is 
the idea. Again, had it been intended or stated or if 
it will be stated in the Gita by the Lord-and if it has 
also been so stated in the Vedas-that Knowledge 
and action are to be practised in combination by 
one and the same person for attaining the same 
human Goal, why then should He here tell His 
dear supplicant Arjuna, that steadfastness in either 
Knowledge or action is to be practised only by 
different persons who are respectively qualified? If, 
on the other hand, it be supposed that the Lord's 
idea is, 'After hearing about both Knowledge and 
action, Arjuna will himself practise them (in 
combination); but, to others, I shall speak of them 
as being meant to be pursued by different persons', 
then the Lord would be imagined to be unreliable, 
being possessed of likes and dislikes! And that is 
untenable. So, from no point of view whatsoever 
can there be a combination of Knowledge and 
action. And what has been said by Arjuna 
regarding superiority of Wisdom over action, that 
stands confirmed for not having been refuted; and 
(it also stands confirmed) that steadfastness in 
Knowledge is suitable for being practised by 
monks alone. And from the statement that they 
(Knowledge and action) are to be followed by 
different persons, it is understood that this has the 
Lord's approval. Noticing that Arjuna had become 
dejected under the impression, 'You are urging me 
to that very action which is a source of bondage', 
and was thinking thus, 'I shall not undertake 
action', the Lord said, 'Na karmanam anarambhat, 
not by abstaining from action,' etc. Or:-When 
steadfastness in Knowledge and steadfastness in 
action become incapable of being pursued 
simultaneously by one and the same person owing 
to mutual contradiction, then, since it may be 
concluded that they become the cause of attaining 
the human Goal independently of each other, 
therefore, in order to show-that the steadfastness in 
action is a means to the human Goal, not 
independently, but by virtue of being instrumental 
in securing steadfastness in Knowledge; and that, 
on the other hand, steadfastness in Knowledge, 
having come into being through the means of 
steadfastness in action, leads to the human Goal 
independently without anticipating anything else,
the Lord said: 
3.4 A person does not attain freedom from action 
by abstaining from action; nor does he attain 
fulfilment merely through renunciation. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.4 Purusah, a person; na does not; asnute, attain; 
naiskarmyam, freedom from action, the state of 
being free from action, steadfastness in the Yoga of 
Knowledge, i.e. the state of abiding in one's own 
Self which is free from action; anarambhat, by 
abstaining; karmanam, from actions-by the non performance of actions such as sacrifices etc. which 
are or were performed in the present or past lives, 
which are the causes of the purification of the mind 
by way of attenuating the sins incurred, and 
which, by being the cause of that (purification), 
become the source of steadfastness in Knowledge 
through the generation of Knowledge, as stated in 
the Smrti (text), 'Knowledge arises in a person from 
the attenuation of sinful acts' [the whole verse is: 
Jnanam utpadyate pumsamksayatpapasya 
karmanah; Yathadarsatalaprakhye 
pasyatyatmanamatmani. 'Knowledge arises...acts. 
One sees the Self in oneself as does one (see 
oneself) in a cleaned surface of a mirror'.-Tr.] (Mbh. 
Sa. 204.8). This is the import. From the statement 
that one does not attain freedom from action by 
abstaining from actions, it may be concluded that 
one attains freedom from action by following the 
opposite course of performing actions. What, 
again, is the reason that one does not attain 
freedom from action by abstaining from actions? 
The answer is: Because performing actions is itself 
a means to freedom from action. Indeed, there can 
be no attainment of an end without (its) means. 
And Karma-yoga is the means to the Yoga of 
Knowledge characterized by freedom from action, 
because it has been so established in the Upanisads 
and here as well. As for the Upanisads, it has been 
shown in the texts, 'The Brahmanas seek to know It 
through the study of the Vedas, sacrifices, (charity, 
and austerity consisting in a dispassionate 
enjoyment of sense-objects)' (Br. 4.4.22), etc. whch 
deal with the means of realizing the goal of 
Knowledge under discussion, viz the Realm of the 
Self, that the Yoga of Karma is a means to the Yoga 
of Knowledge . And even here (in the Gita), the 
Lord will established that, 'But, O mighty-armed 
one, renunciation is hard to attain without (Karma-
)yoga' (5.6); 'By giving up attachment, the yogis 
undertake work...for the purification of themselves' 
(5.11); 'Sacrifice, charity and austerity are verily the 
purifiers of the wise' (18.5), etc. Objection: Is it not 
that in such texts as-'Extending to all creatures 
immunity from fear' (Na. Par. 5.43), (one should 
take recourse to freedom from action)-, it is shown 
that attainment of freedom from action follows 
even from the renunciation of obligatory duties? 
And in the world, too, it is a better known fact that 
freedom from action follows abstention from 
actions. Hence also arises the question, 'Why 
should one who desires freedom from action 
undertake action?' Reply: Therefore the Lord said: 
Na ca, nor; samadhi-gacchati, does he attain; 
siddhim, fulfilment steadfastness in the Yoga of 
Knowledge, characterized by freedom from action; 
sannyasanat eva, merely through renunciation even from the mere renunciation of actions which 
is devoid of Knowledge. What, again, is the reason 
that by the mere giving up of actions which is not 
accompanied with Knowledge, a person does not 
attain fulfulment in the form of freedom from 
actions? To this query seeking to know the cause, 
the Lord says: 
3.5 Because, no one ever remains even for a 
moment without doing work. For all are made to 
work under compulsion by the gunas born of 
Nature. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.5 Hi, because; na kascit, no one; jatu, ever; 
tisthati, remains; api, even; for so much time as a 
ksanam, moment; akarma-krt, without doing work. 
Why? Hi, for; sarvah, all creatures; karyate karma, 
are made to work; verily avasah, under 
compulsion; gunaih, by the gunas-sattva 
(goodness); rajas (activity), and tamas (mental 
darkness); prakrti-jaih, born of Nature. The word 
'unenlightened' has to be added to the sentence, 
since the men of realzation have been spoken of 
separately in, 'who is not distracted by the three 
gunas (qualities)' (14.23). For Karma-yoga is meant 
only for the unenlightened, nor for the men of 
Knowledge. Karma-yoga, on the other hand, is not 
pertinent for the men of Knowledge who, because 
of their not moving away from their own Self, are 
not shaken by the gunas. This has been explained 
similarly in, 'he who has known this One as 
indestructible' (2.21). But, if one who is not a 
knower of the self does not perform prescribed 
action, then this is certainly bad. Hence the Lord 
says: 
3.6 One, who after withdrawing the organs of 
action, sits mentally recollecting the objects of the 
senses, that one, of deluded mind, is called a 
hypocrite. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.6 Yah, one who; samyamya, after withdrawing; 
karma-indriyani, the organs of action-hands etc.; 
aste, sits; manasa, mentally; smaran, recollecting, 
thinking; indriya-arthan, the objects of the senses; 
sah, that one; vimudha-atma, of deluded mind; 
ucyate, is called; mithya-acarah, a hypocrite, a 
sinful person. 
3.7 But, O Arjuna, one who engages in Karma-yoga 
with the organs of action, controlling the organs 
with the mind and becoming unattached-that one 
excels. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.7 Tu, but, on the other hand, O Arjuna; yah, one 
who is unenlightened and who is eligible for 
action; arabhate, engages in;-what does he engage 
in? the Lord says in answer-karma yogam, Karma-
yoga; karma-indriyaih, with the organs of action, 
with speech, hands, etc.; niyamya, controlling; 
indriyani, the sense-organs; manasa, with the 
mind; and becoming asaktah unattached; [Here 
Ast; adds 'phalabhisandhi-varjitah, free from 
hankering for results'.-Tr.] sah, that one; visisyate, 
excels the other one, the hypocrite. This being so, 
therefore, 
3.8 You perform the obligatory duties, for action is 
superior to inaction. And, through inaction, even 
the maintenance of your body will not be possible. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.8 Tvam, you, O Arjuna; kuru, perform; niyatam, 
the obligatory; karma, duties, those daily 
obligatory duties (nitya-karmas) or which one is 
competent (according to the scriptures), and which 
are not heard of [although no result of daily 
obligatory duties is mentioned in the scriptures, 
still Sankaracarya holds that it is either heaven or 
purification of the heart, because something done 
must have its consequence.-Tr.] as productive of 
any result; hi, for, from the point of view of result; 
karma, action; is jyayah, superior; akarmanah, to 
inaction, to non-performance (of duties). Why? Ca, 
and; akarmanah, through inaction; api, even; te 
sarira-yatra, the maintenance of your body; na 
prasiddhyet, will not be possible. Therefore, the 
distinction between action and in action is abvious 
in this world. 'And as regards your ideea that 
action should not be udnertaken because it leads to 
bondage-that too is wrong.' How? 
3.9 This man becomes bound by actions other than 
that action meant for God. Without being attached, 
O son of Kunti, you perform actions for Him. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.9 Ayam, this; lokah, man, the one who is eligible 
for action; karma-bandhanah, becomes bound by 
actions- the person who has karma as his bondage 
(bandhana) is karma-bandhanah-; anyatra, other 
than; that karmanah, action; yajnarthat, meant for 
Got not by that meant for God. According to the 
Vedic text, 'Sacrifice is verily Visnu' (Tai. Sam.1.7.4), 
yajnah means God; whatever is done for 
Him is yajnartham. Therefore, mukta-sangah, 
without being attached, being free from attachment 
to the results of actions; O son of Kunti, samacara, 
you perform; karma, actions; tadartham, for Him, 
for God. An eligible person should engage in work 
for the following reason also: 
3.10 In the days of yore, having created the beings 
together with the sacrifices, Prajapati said: 'By this 
you multiply. Let this be your yielder of coveted 
objects of desire.' 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.10 Pura, in the days of yore, in the beginning of 
creation; srstva, having created; prajah, the beings, 
the people of the three castes; saha-yajnah, together 
with the sacrifices; Prajapati, the creator of beings, 
uvaca, said; 'Anena, by this sacrifice; 
prasavisyadhvam, you multiply.' Prasava means 
origination, growth. 'You accomplish that. Esah 
astu, let this sacrifice be; vah, your; ista-kama dhuk, yielder of coveted objects of desire.' That 
which yields (dhuk) coveted (ista) objects of desire 
(kama), particular results, is istakama-dhuk. How? 
3.11 'You nourish the gods with this. Let those 
gods nourish you. Nourishing one another, you 
shall attain the supreme Good.' 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.11 'Bhavayata, you nourish; devan, the gods, 
Indra and others; anena, with this sarifice. Let te 
devah, those gods; bhavayantu, nourish; vah, you make you contented with rainfall etc. Thus 
bhavayantah, nourishing; parasparam, one 
another; avapsyatha, you shall attain; the param, 
supreme; sreyah, Good, called Liberation, through 
the attainment of Knowledge;' or, 'you shall attain 
heaven-which is meant by param 'sreyah.' [The 
param sreyah (supreme Good) will either mean 
liberation or heaven in accordance with aspirant's 
hankering for Liberation or enjoyment.] Moreover, 
3.12 'Being nourished by sacrifices, the gods will 
indeed give you the coveted enjoyments. He is 
certainly a theif who enjoys what have been given 
by them without offering (these) to them.' 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.12 'Yajna-bhavitah, being nourished, i.e. being 
satisfied, by sacrifices; devah, the gods; dasyante 
hi, will indeed give, will distribute; among vah, 
you; the istan, coveted; bhogan, enjoyments, such 
as wife, childeren and cattle. Sah, he; is eva, 
certainly; a stenah, thief, a stealer of the wealth of 
gods and others; yah, who; bhunkte, enjoys, 
gratifies only his own body and organs; with 
dattan, what enjoyable things have been given; 
taih, by them, by the gods; apradaya, without 
offering (these); ebhyah, to them, i.e. without 
repaying the debt [The three kinds of debt-to the 
gods, to the rsis (sage), and to the manes-are repaid 
by satisfying them through sacrifices, celibacy 
(including study of the Vedas, etc.), and 
procreation, respectively. Unless one repays these 
debts, he incurs sin.] to them.' 
3.13 By becoming partakers of the remembers of 
sacrifices, they become freed from all sins. But the 
unholy persons who cook for themselves, they 
incur sin. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.13 Those again, who are yajna-sista-asinah, 
partakers of the remnants of sacrifices, who, after 
making offering to the gods and others, [The 
panca-maha-yajnas, five great offerings, which 
have to be made by every householder are 
offerings to gods, manes, humans, creatures and 
rsis (sages).] are habituated to eat the remnants (of 
those offerings), called nectar; they, santah, by 
being (so); mucyante, become freed; sarva kilbisaih, from all sins-from those sins incurred 
through the five things [the five things are; oven, 
water-pot, cutting instruments, grinding machines 
and broom. A householder incurs sin by killing 
insects etc. with these things, knowingly or 
unknowingly. It is atoned by making the aforesaid 
five offerings.], viz oven etc., and also from those 
others incurred owing to injury etc. caused 
inadvertently. Tu, but; the papah, unholy persons, 
who are selfish; ye, who; pacanti, cook; atma karanat, for themselves; te, they, being themselves 
sinful; bhunjate, incur; agham, sin. For the 
following reasons also actions should be 
undertaken by an eligible person. Action is 
definitely the cause of the movement of the wheel 
of the world. How? This is being answered: 
3.14 From food are born the creatures; the origin of 
food is from rainfall; rainfall originates from 
sacrifice; sacrifice has action as its origin. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.14 It is a matter of direct perception that annat, 
from food, which is eaten and is transformed into 
blood and semen; bhavanti, are born; bhutani, the 
creatures. Anna-sambhavah, the origin of food; is 
parjanyat, from rainfall. Parjanyah, rainfall; 
bhavati, originates; from yajnat, from sacrifice. This 
accords with the Smrti, 'The oblations properly 
poured into fire reaches the sun. From the sun 
comes rain, from rain comes food, and from the 
sun comes rain, from rain comes food, and from 
that the creatures' (Ma.Sm.3.76). (Here) sacrifice 
means its unique [Also termed as the unseen result 
(adrsta).-Tr.] result. And that sacrifice, i.e. the 
unique result, which arises (samudbhavah) from 
action (karma) undertaken by the priest and the 
sacrificer, is karma-samudbhavah; it has action for 
its origin. 
3.15 Know that actin has the veda as its origin; the 
Vedas has the Immutable as its source. Hence, the 
all-pervading Veda is for ever based on sacrifice. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.15 Again, [a different reading in place of this is: 
'Tat ca vividham karma kuto jatamityaha, From 
where did those various kinds of action originate? 
In reply the Lord says...' Still another reading is: 
'Tat ca karma brahmodbhavam iti aha, And the 
Lord says: That action has the Vedas as its origin.'-
vide A.A., 1936, p. 116). Astekar's reading is: Tat ca 
evam vidham karma kuto jatamityaha, And from 
where has this kind of aciton originated? The 
answers this.'-Tr.] viddhi, know; that karma, 
action; is brahmodbhavam, it has Brahma, the 
Veda, as its udbhavam, origin. [Here Ast. adds 
'revealer'-Tr.] Further, Brahma, called the Veda, is 
aksara-samudbhavam, it has aksara, the 
Immutable, Brahman, the supreme Self, as its 
source. This is the meaning. Since the Veda came 
out, like the breath of a man, from the supreme Self 
Itself, called the Immutable, therefore the Veda, 
being the revealer of everything, is sarva-gatam, all 
pervading. Even though all-pervading, the Veda is 
nityam, for ever; pratisthitam, based; yajne, on 
sacrifice, because the injunctions about sacrifices 
predominate in it. 
3.16 O Partha, he lives in vain who does not follow 
here the wheel thus set in motion, whose life is 
sinful, and who indulges in the senses. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.16 O Partha, sah, he; jivati, lives; mogham, in 
vain; yah, who, though competent for action; na 
anuvartayati, does not follow; iha, here, in the 
world; cakram, the wheel of the world; evam, thus; 
pravartitam, set in motion, by God, on the basis of 
the Vedas and the sacrifices; aghayuh, whose life 
(ayuh) is sinful (agham), i.e. whose life is vile; and 
indriya-aramah, who indulges in the senses-who 
has his arama, sport, enjoyment, with objects, 
indriyaih, through the senses. Therefore, the gist of 
the topic under discussion is that action must be 
undertaken by one who is qualified (for action) but 
is unenlightened. In the verses beginning from, '(A 
person does not attain freedom from action by 
adstaining from action' (4) and ending with, 'You 
perform the obligatory duties...And, through 
inaction, even the maintenance of your body will 
not be possible' (8), it has been proved that before 
one attains fitness for steadfastness in the 
knowledge of the Self, it is the bounden duty of a 
person who is qualified for action, but is not 
enlightened, to undertake Karma-yoga for that 
purpose. And then, also in the verses commencing 
from '(This man becomes bound) by actions other 
than that action meant for God' (9) and ending 
with 'O Partha, he lives in vain,' many reasons 
[Such as, that it pleases God, secures the affection 
of the gods, and so on.] have been incidentally 
stated as to why a competent person has to 
undertake actions; and the evils arising from their 
non-performance have also been emphatically 
declared. Such being the conclusion, the question 
arises whether the wheel thus set in motion should 
be followed by all, or only by one who is ignorant 
of the Self and has not attained to the steadfastness 
which is fit to be practised by the Sankhyas, the 
knowers of the Self, through the Yoga of 
Knowledge only, and which is acquired by one 
ignorant of the Self through the means of the 
practice of Karma-yoga mentioned above? Either 
anticipating Arjuna's question to this effect, or in 
order to make the meaning of the scripture (Gita) 
clearly understood, the Lord, revealing out of His 
own accord that the following substance of the 
Upanisads-Becoming freed from false knowledge 
by knowing this very Self, the Brahmanas renounce 
what is a compulsory duty for those having false 
knoweldge, viz, desire for sons, etc., and then lead 
a mendicant life just for the purpose of maintaining 
the body; they have no duty to perform other than 
steadfastness in the knowledge of the Self (cf. Br.3.5.1) has been presented here in the Gita, says: 
3.17 But that man who rejoices only in theSelf and 
is satisfied with the Self, and is contented only in 
the Self-for him there is no duty to perform. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.17 Tu, but; that manavah, man, the sannyasin, the 
man of Knowledge, steadfast in the knowledge of 
the Self; yah, who; atmaratih eva syat, rejoices only 
in the Self-not in the sense objects; and atma trptah, who is satisfied only with the Self-not with 
food and drink; and is santustah, contented; eva, 
only; atmani, in the Self; tasya, for him; na vidyate, 
there is no; karyam, duty [Duty with a view to 
securing Liberation.] to perform. [Rati, trpti and 
santosa, though synonymous, are used to indicate 
various types of pleasures. Or, rati means 
attachment to objects; trpti means happiness 
arising from contact with some particular object; 
and santosa means happiness in general, arising 
from the acquisition of some coveted object only.] 
All people surely feel contened by acquiring an 
external thing. But this one, without depending on 
it, remains contented only with the Self; that is to 
say, he remains detached from everything. The 
idea it that, for a man who is such a knower of the 
Self, there is no duty to undertake. 
3.18 For him there is no concern here at all with 
performing action; nor any (concern) with 
nonperformance. Moreover, for him there is no 
dependence on any object to serve any purpose. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.18 Moreover, tasya, for him, who rejoices in the 
supreme Self; na, there is no; artham, concern; eva, 
at all; krtena, with performing action. Objection: In 
that case, let there be some evil called sin owing to 
non-performance! Reply: Iha, here, in this world; 
na, nor is there; for him kascana, any (concern); 
akrtena, with nonperfromance. Certainly there is 
no evil in the form of incurring sin or in the form of 
self-destruction. Ca, moreover; asya, for him; na 
asti, there is no; kascit artha-vyapasrayah sarva-
bhutesu, dependence on any object, from Brahma 
to an unmoving thing, to serve any purpose. 
Vyapasrayah is the same as vyapasrayanam, 
dependence, which is possible of being created by 
action promted by necessity. (For him) there is no 
end to gain by depending on any praticular object, 
due to which there can be some action for that 
purpose. 'You (Arjuna) are not established in this 
fullest realization which is comparable to a flood 
all around.' 
3.19 Therefore, remaining unattached, always 
perform the obligatory duty, for, by performing 
(one's) duty without attachment, a person attains 
the Highest. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.19 Since this is so, therefore, asaktah, remaining 
unattached; samacara, perform; satatam, always; 
karyam, the obligatory; daily karma, duty; hi, for; 
acaran, by performing; (one's) karma, duty; 
asaktah, without attachment, by doing work as a 
dedication to God; purusah, a person; apnoti, 
attains; param, the Highest, Liberation, through the 
purification of the mind. This is meaning. And 
(you should perform your duty) for the following 
reason also: 
3.20 For Janaka and others strove to attain 
Liberation through action itself. You ought to 
perform (your duties) keeping also in view the 
prevention of mankind from going astray. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.20 Hi, for; in the olden days, the leaned Ksatriyas, 
janakadayah, Janaka and others such as Asvapati; 
asthitah, strove to attain; samsiddim, Liberation; 
karmana eva, through action itself. If it be that they 
were possessed of the fullest realization, then the 
meaning is that they remained established in 
Liberation whlile continuing, because of past 
momentum, to be associated with action itself without renouncing it-with a veiw to preventing 
mankind from going astray. Again, if (it be that) 
Janaka and others had not attained fullest 
realization, then, they gradually became 
established in Liberation through action which is a 
means for the purification of the mind. The verse is 
to be explained thus. On the other hand, if you 
think, 'Obligatory duty was performed even by 
Janaka and others of olden days who were surely 
unenlightened. [Ajanadbhih: This is also translated 
as, 'surely because they were unenlightened'.-Tr.] 
There by it does not follow that action has to be 
undertaken by somebody else who has the fullest 
enlightenment and has reached his Goal', 
nevertheless, tvam, you, who are under the 
influence of past actions; arhasi, ought; kartum, to 
perform (your duties); sampasyan api, keeping 
also in view; loka-sangraham, [V.S.A gives the 
meanings of the phrase as 'the welfare of the 
world', and 'propitiation of mankind'.-Tr. ] the 
prevention of mankind from going astray; even 
that purpose. By whom, and how, is mankind to be 
prevented from going astray? That is being stated: 
[In Ast. this introductory sentence is as 
follows:loka-samgrahah kimartham kartavyam iti 
ucyate.-Tr.] 
3.21 Whatever a superior person does, another 
person does that very thing! Whatever he upholds 
as authority, an ordinary person follows that. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.21 Yat yat, [This is according to the Ast. The G1. 
Pr. reads, yat yat yesu yesu.-Tr.] whatever action; a 
sresthah, superior person, a leader; acarati, does; 
itarah, another; janah, person, who follows him; 
does tat tat eva, that very action. Further, yat, 
whatever; sah, he, the superior person; kurute, 
upholds; as pramanam, authority, be it Vedic or 
secular; lokah, an ordinary person; anuvartate, 
follows; tat, that, i.e. he accepts that very thing as 
authoritative. 'If you have a doubt here with regard 
to the duty of preventing people from straying, 
then why do you not observe Me?' 
3.22 In all the three worlds, O Partha, there is no 
duty whatsoever for Me (to fulfil); nothing remains 
unachieved or to be achieved. [According to S. the 
translation of this portion is: There is nothing 
unattained that should be attained.-Tr.] (Still) do I 
continue in action. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.22 O Partha, na asti, there is no; kartavyam, duty; 
kincana, whatsoever; me, for Me (to fulfill); even 
trisu lokesu, in all the three worlds. Why? There is 
na anavaptam, nothing (that remains) unachieved; 
or avaptavyam, to be achieved. Still varte eva, do I 
continue; karmani, in action. 
3.23 For, O Partha, if at any time I do not continue 
[Ast. and A.A. read varteya instead of varteyam.-
Tr.] vigilantly in action, men will follow My path in 
every way. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.23 Again, O Partha, yadi, if; jatu, at any time; 
aham, I; an, do not; varteyam, continue; atandritah, 
vigilantly, untiringly; karmani, in action; 
manusyah, men: anuvartante, willl follow; mama, 
My; vartma, path; sarvasah, in every way, I being 
the Highest. And if that be so, what is the harm? In 
reply the Lord says: [Ast. omits this sentence 
completely.-Tr.] 
3.24 These worlds will be ruined if I do not 
perform action. And I shall become the agent of 
intermingling (of castes), and shall be destroying 
these beings. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.24 Cet, if; aham, I; na kuryam, do not perform; 
karma, action; all ime, these; lokah, worlds; 
utsideyuh, will be ruined, owing to the obsence of 
work responsible for the maintenance of the 
worlds. Ca, and, futher; syam, I shall become; 
karta, the agent; sankarasya, of intermingling (of 
castes). Consequently, upahanyam, I shall be 
destroying; imah, these; prajah, beings. That is to 
say, I who am engaged in helping the creatures, 
shall be destroying them. This would be 
unbefitting of Me, who am God. 'On the other, if, 
like Me, you or some one else possesses the 
conviction of having attained Perfection and is a 
knower of the Self, it is a duty of such a one, too, to 
help others even if there be no obligation on his 
own part.' 
3.25 O scion of the Bharata dynasty, as the 
unelightened poeple act with attachment to work, 
so should the enlightened person act, without 
attachment, being desirous of the prevention of 
people from going astray. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.25 O scion of the Bharata dynasty, yatha, as; some 
avidvamsah, unenlightened poele; kurvanti, act. 
saktah, with attachment; karmani, to work, 
(thinking) 'The reward of this work will accrue to 
me'; tatha, so; should vidvan, the enlightened 
person, the knower of the Self; kuryat, act; asaktah, 
without attachment, remaining unattached. 
[Giving up the idea of agentship and the hankering 
for the rewards of actions to oneself.] Whay does 
he (the enlightened person) act like him (the 
former)? Listen to that: Cikirsuh, being desirous of 
achieving; lokasamgraham, prevention of people 
from going astray. 'Neither for Me who am a 
knower of the Self, nor for any other (knower of 
the Self) who wants thus prevent people from 
going astray, is there any duty apart from working 
for the welfare of the world. Hence, the following 
advice is being given to such a knower of the Self:' 
3.26 The enlightened man should not create 
disturbance in the beliefs of the ignorant, who are 
attached to work. Working, while himself 
remaining deligen [Some translate yuktah as, 'in 
the right manner'. S. takes it in the sense of Yoga-
yuktah, merged in yoga.-Tr.], he should make 
them do [Another reading is yojayet, meaning the 
same as josayet.-Tr.] all the duties. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.26 Vidvan the enlightened man; na janayet, 
should not create; buddhi-bhedam, disturbance in 
the beliefs-disturbance in the firm belief, 'This has 
to be done; and the result of this action is to be 
reaped by me'; ajnanam, of the ignorant, of the 
non-discriminating one; karma-sanginam, who are 
attached to work. But what should he do? Himself 
samacaran, working, performing those very 
activities of the ignorant; yuktah, while remaining 
diligent; josayet, he should make them do; sarva karmani, all the duties. How does an anillumined, 
ignorant person be come attached to actions? In 
reply the Lord says: 
3.27 While actions are being done in every way by 
the gunas (qualities) of Nature, one who is deluded 
by egoism thinks thus: 'I am the doer.' 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.27 Karmani kriyamanani, while actions, secular 
and scriptural, are being done; sarvasah, in ever 
way; gunaih, by the gunas, (i.e.) by the 
modifications in the form of body and organs; 
(born) prakrteh, of Nature-Nature, (otherwise 
known as) Pradhana [Pradhana, Maya, the Power 
of God.], being the state of equilibrium of the three 
qualities of sattva, rajas and tamas; ahankara vimudha-atma, one who is deluded by egoism; 
manyate, thinks; iti, thus; 'Aham karta, I am the 
doer.' Ahankara is self-identification with the 
aggregate of body and organs. He whose atma, 
mind, is vimudham, diluded in diverse ways, by 
that (ahankara) is ahankara-vimudha-atma. He 
who imagines the characteristics of the body and 
organs to be his own, who has self-identification 
with the body and the organs, and who, through 
ignorance, believes the activities to be his own-, he 
thinks, 'I am the doer of those diverse activities.' 
3.28 But, O mighty-armed one, the one who is a 
knower of the facts about the varieties of the gunas 
(qualities) and actions does not become attached, 
thinking thus: 'The organs rest (act) on the objects 
of the organs.' 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.28 Tu, but, on the other hand; he who is a 
knower, tattva-vit, a knower of the facts;-knower of 
what kinds of facts?-guna-karma-vibhagayoh, 
about the varieties of the gunas and actions, i.e. a 
knower of the diversity of the gunas and the 
diversity of acitons; [Guna-vibhaga means the 
products of Prakrti which consists of the three 
gunas. They are the five subtle elements, mind, 
intellect, ego, five sensory organs, five motor 
organs and five objects (sound etc.) of the senses. 
Karma-vibhaga means the varieties of inter-actions 
among these.-Tr.] na sajjate, does not become 
attached; iti matva, thinking thus; 'Gunah, the 
gunas in the form of organs;-not the Self-vartante, 
rest (act); gunesu, on the gunus in the form of 
objects of the organs.' 
3.29 Those who are wholly deluded by the gunas 
of Nature become attached to the activities of the 
gunas. The knower of the All should not disturb 
those of dull intellect, who do not know the All. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.29 Those again, guna-sammudhah, who are 
wholly deluded by the gunas; prakrteh, of Nature; 
sajjante, become attached; guna karmasu, to the 
activities of the gunas, thining, 'We do actions for 
results.' Krtsna-vit, the knower of the All, one who 
is himself a knower of the Self; na vicalayet, should 
not disturb; tan, those who are attached to actions; 
(who are) mandan, of dull intellect; akrtsnavidah, 
who do not know the All, who are all attention on 
the results of actions. Unsetting of beliefs is itself 
the disturbance. That he should not do. This is the 
idea. Again, in what manner should duties be 
under-taken by a seeker after Liberation who is not 
enlightened, who is qualified for actions (rites and 
duties)? As to this, the answer is being stated: 
3.30 Devoid of the fever of the soul, engage in 
battle by dedicating all actions to Me, with (your) 
mind intent on the Self, and becoming free from 
expectations and egoism. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.30 Vigata-jvarah, devoid of the fever of the soul, 
i.e. being free from repentance, without remorse; 
yuddhyasva, engage in battle; sannyasya, by 
dedicating; sarvani, all; karmani, actions; mayi, to 
Me, who am Vasudeva, the omniscient supreme 
Lord, the Self of all; adhyatma-cetasa, with (your) 
mind intent on the Self-with discriminating 
wisdom, with this idea, 'I am an agent, and I work 
for God as a servant'; and further, bhutva, 
becoming; nirasih, free from expectations ['Free 
from expectations of results for yourself']; and 
nirmamah, free from egoism. You from whom has 
vanished the idea, '(this is) mine', are nirmamah. 
3.31 Those men who ever follow this teaching of 
Mine with faith and without cavil, they also 
become freed from actions. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.31 Ye, those; manavah, men; who (nityam, ever;) 
anutisthanti, follow accordingly; me matam, My 
teaching- this teaching of Mine, viz that 'duty must 
be performed', which has been stated with valid 
reasoning; sraddhavantah, with faith; and 
anasuyantah, without cavil, without detracing Me, 
Vasudeva, the Teacher [Here Ast. adds 'parama, 
supreme'-Tr.]; te api, they also, who are such; 
mucyante, become freed; karmabhih, from actions 
called the righteous and the unrighteous. 
3.32 But those who, decaying [Finding fault where 
there is none.] this, do not follow My teaching, 
know them-who are deluded about all knoweldge 
[Knowledge concerning the qualified and the un qualified Brahman.] and who are devoid of 
discrimination-to have gone to ruin. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.32 Tu, but; ye, those who are the opposite of them 
(the former); who abhyasuyantah, decrying; etat, 
this instruction of Mine; na, do not; anutisthanti, 
follow; me, My; matam, teaching, they are deluded 
in various ways with respect to all knowledge. 
Viddhi, know; tan, them; sarva-jnana-vimudhan, 
who are deluded about off knowledge; acetasah, 
who are devoid of discrimination; nastan, to have 
gone to ruin. 'For what reason, again, do they not 
follow your teachings, perform duties that are not 
theirs and not follow their own duties? How is it 
that by remaining opposed to You, they do not fear 
the evil which will arise from transgressing Your 
commandments? As to that, the Lord says: 
3.33 Even a man of wisdom behaves according to 
his own nature. Being follow (their) nature. What 
can restraint do? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.33 Api, even; jnanavan, a man of wisdom-what to 
speak of a fool!; cestate, behaves; Sadrsam, 
according to;-what? svasyah, his own; prakrteh, 
nature. Nature means the impressions of virtue, 
vice, etc. [Also, knowledge, desires, and so on.] 
acquired in the past (lives) and which become 
manifest at the commencement of the present life. 
All creatures (behave) according to that only. 
Therefore, bhutani, beings; yanti, follow; (their) 
prakrtim, nature. Nigrahah kim karisyati, what can 
restraint do, be it from Me or anybody else? If all 
beings behave only according to their own nature and there is none without his nature-, then, since 
there arises the contingency of the scriptures 
becoming purposeless owing to the absence of any 
scope for personal effort, therefore the following is 
being stated: 
3.34 Attraction and repulsion are ordained with 
regard to the objects of all the organs. One should 
not come under the sway of these two, because 
they are his adversaries. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.34 Raga-dvesau, attraction and repulsion, in the 
following manner-attraction towards desirable 
things, and repulsion against undesirable things; 
(vyavasthitau, are ordained,) are sure to occur, 
arthe, with regard to objects such as sound etc.; 
indriyasya indriyasya, of all the organs, with 
regard to each of the organs. As to that, the scope 
of personal effort and scriptural purpose are being 
stated as follows: One who is engaged in the 
subject-matter of the scriptures should, in the very 
beginning, not come under the influence of love 
and hatred. For, that which is the nature of a 
person impels him to his actions, verily under the 
influence eof love and hatred. And then follow the 
rejection of one's own duty and the undertaking of 
somebody else's duty. On the other hand, when a 
person controls love and hatred with the help of 
their opposites [Ignorance, the cause of love and 
hatred, has discrimination as its opposite.], then he 
becomes mindful only of the scriptural teachings; 
he ceases to be led by his nature. Therefore, na 
agacchet, one should not come; vasam, under the 
sway; tayoh, of these two, of love and hatred; hi 
because; tau, they; are asya, his, this person's pari panthinau, adversaries, who, like robbers, put 
obstacles on his way to Liberation. This is the 
meaning. In this world, one impelled by love and 
hatred misinterprets even the teaching of the 
scriptures, and thinks that somebody else's duty, 
too, has to be undertaken just because it is a duty! 
That is wrong: 
3.35 One's own duty [Customary or scripturally 
ordained observances of different castes and sects.-
Tr.], though defective, is superior to another's duty 
well-performed. Death is better while engaged in 
one's own duty; another's duty is fraught with fear. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.35 Svadharmah, one's own duty; being practised 
even though vigunah, defective, deficient; is 
sreyan, superior to, more commendable than; para dharmat, another's duty; though svanusthitat, 
well-performed, meritoriously performed. Even 
nidhanam, death; is sreyah, better; while engaged 
svadharme, in one's own duty, as compared with 
remaining alive while engaged in somebody else's 
duty. Why? Paradharmah, another's duty; is 
bhayavahah, fraught with fear, since it invites 
dangers such as hell etc. Although the root cause of 
evil was stated in, 'In the case of a person who 
dwells on objects' (2.62) and '.....because they 
(attraction and repulsion) are his adversaries' (34), 
that was presented desultorily and vaguely. 
Wishing to know it briefly and definitely as, 'This 
is thus, to be sure', Arjuna, with the idea, 'When 
this indeed becomes known, I shall make effort for 
its eradication', said: 
3.36 Arjuna said -- Now then, O scion of the Vrsni 
dynasty (Krsna), impelled by what does this man 
commit sin even against his wish, being 
constrained by force, as it were? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.36 Atha, now then; varsneya, O scion of the Vrsni 
dynasty; being prayuktah, impelled; kena, by what 
acting as the cause; as a servant is by a king, does 
ayam, this; purusah, man; carati, commit; papam, 
sin, a sinful act; api, even; anicchan, against his 
wish, though not himself willing; niyojitah, being 
constrained; balat, by force; iva, as it were-as if by a 
king, which illustration has already been given? 
The Lord (Bhaga-van) said: 'You hear about that 
enemy, the source of all evil, of which you ask-.' 
'Bhaga is said to consist of all kinds of majesty, 
virtue, fame, beauty, detachment as well as 
Liberation [Liberation stands for its cause, 
Illumination.], (V.P.6.5.74). That Vasudeva, in 
whom reside for ever, unimpeded and in their 
fullness, the six qualities of majesty etc. and who 
has the knowledge of such subjects as creation etc., 
is called Bhaga-van. 'He is spoken of as Bhaga-van 
who is aware of creation and dissolution, gain and 
loss, [Gain and loss stand for future prosperity and 
adversity.] ignorance and Illumination of all 
beings' (ibid. 78). 
3.37 The Blessed Lord said -- This desire, this 
anger, born of the quality of rajas, is a great 
devourer, a great sinner. Know this to be the 
enemy here. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.37 Esah, this; kamah, desire, is the enemy of the 
whole world, because of which the creatures incur 
all evil. This desire when obstructed in any way 
turns into anger. Therefore, krodhah, anger, is also 
identical with this (desire). It is rajoguna samudbhavah, born of the quality of rajas; or, it is 
the origin of the quality of rajas. For, when desire 
comes into being, it instigates a person by arousing 
rajas. People who are engaged in service etc., 
which are effects of rajas, and who are stricken 
with sorrow are heard to lament, 'I have been led 
to act by desire indeed!' It is mahaasanah, a great 
devourer, whose food is enormous. And hence, 
indeed, it is maha-papma, a great sinner. For a 
being commits sin when goaded by desire. 
Therefore, viddhi, know; enam, this desire; to be 
vairinam, the enemy; iha, here in this world. With 
the help of examples the Lord explains how it is an 
enemy: 
3.38 As fire is enveloped by smoke, as a mirror by 
dirt, and as a foetus remains enclosed in the womb, 
so in this shrouded by that. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.38 Yatha, as; vahnih, fire, which is naturally 
bright; avriyate, is enveloped; dhumena, by smoke, 
which is born concomitantly (with fire) and is 
naturally dark; or as adarsah, a mirror; is covered 
malena, by dirt; ca, and; garbhah, a foetus; is 
avrtah, enclosed; ulbena, in the womb by the 
amnion; tatha, so; is idam, this; avrtam, shrouded; 
tena, by that. Again, what is that which is indicated 
by the word idam (this), and which is covered by 
desire? The answer is: 
3.39 O son of Kunti, Knowledge is covered by this 
constant enemy of the wise in the form of desire, 
which is an insatiable fire. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.39 Jnanam, Knowledge; is avrtam, covered; etena, 
by this; nityavairina, constant enemy; jnaninah, of 
the wise. For the wise person knows even earlier, 'I 
am being induced by this into evil.' And he always 
[Both at the time when desire arises in him, and 
also when he is forced to act by it.] feels distressed. 
Therefore, it is the constant enemy of the wise but 
not of a fool. For the fool looks upon desire as a 
friend so long as hankering lasts. When sorrow 
comes as a consequence, he realizes, 'I have been 
driven into sorrow because of longings', but 
certainly not earlier. Therefore it is the constant 
enemy of the wise alone. In what form? Kama rupena, in the form of desire-tha which has wish 
itself as its expression is kama-rupa; in that form-; 
(and) duspurena, which is an insatiable; analena, 
fire. That which is difficult to satisfy is duspurah; 
and (derivatively) that which never has enough 
(alam) is analam. Again, having what as its abode 
does desire, in the form of a viel over Knowledge, 
become the enemy of all? Since when the abode of 
an enemy is known, it is possible to easily slay the 
enemy, therefore the Lord says: 
3.40 The organs, mind, and the intellect are said to 
be its abode. This one diversely deludes the 
embodied being by veiling Knowledge with the 
help of these. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.40 Indriyani, the organs; manah, mind; and 
buddhih, the intellect; ucyate, are said to be; asya, 
its, desire's; adhisthanam, abode. Esah, this one, 
desire; vimohayati, diversely deludes; dehinam, 
the embodied being; avrtya, by veiling; jnanam, 
Knowledg; etaih, with the help of these, with the 
organs etc. which are its abodes. [The activities of 
the organs etc. are the media for the expression of 
desire. Desire covers the Knoweldge of the Self by 
stimulating these.] 
3.41 Therefore, O scion of the Bharata dynasty, 
after first controlling the organs, renounce this one 
[A variant reading is, 'prajahi hi-enam, completely 
renounce this one'.-Tr.] which is sinful and a 
destroyer of learning and wisdom. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.41 Since this is so, therefore, O scion of the 
Bharata dynasty, adau niyamya, after first 
controlling; indriyani, the organs; prajahihi,
renounce; enam, this one, the enemy under 
consideration; which is papmanam, sinful-which is 
desire that is accustomed to sinning; and jnana vijnana-nasanam, a destroyer of learning and 
wisdom, jnana, learning, means knowledge about 
the Self etc. from the scripures and a teacher. 
Vijnana, wisdom, means the full experience of that. 
Renounce, i.e. discard, from yourself the destroyer 
of those two-learning and wisdom, which are the 
means to the achievement Liberation. It has been 
said, 'After first controlling the organs, renounce 
desire the enemy'. As to that, by taking the support 
of what should one give up desire? This is being 
answered: 
3.42 They say that the organs are superior (to the 
gross body); the mind is superior to the organs; but 
the intellect is superior to the mind. However, the 
one who is superior to the intellect is He. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.42 The learned ones ahuh, say; that indriyani, the 
five [Five sense-organs: of vision, hearning, taste, 
smell and touch; five motor-organs: hands, feet, 
speech, and for excretion and generation-these 
latter five are also understood in the present 
context.] organs-ear etc., are parani, superior, to the 
external, gross and limited body, from the point of 
view of subtlety, inner position, pervasiveness, etc. 
So also, manah, the mind, having the nature of 
thinking and doubting; [Sankalpa: will, volition, 
intention, thought, reflection, imangination, etc. 
vikalpa:doubt, uncertainly, indecision, suspicion, 
error, etc.-V.S.A.] is param, superior; indriyebhyah, 
to the organs. Similarly, buddhih, the intellect, 
having the nature of determination; is para, 
superior; manasah, to the mind. And yah, the one 
who is innermost as compared with all the objects 
of perception ending with the intellect, and with 
regard to which Dweller in the body it has been 
said that desire, in association with its 'abodes' 
counting from the organs, deludes It by shrouding 
Knowledge; sah, that one; is tu, however; paratah, 
superior; buddheh, to the intellect- He, the 
supreme Self, is the witness of the intellect. [The 
portion, 'with regard to which Dweller...the 
supreme Self,' is translated from Ast. Which has 
the same reading here as the A.A. The G1. Pr. 
Makes the "abode'' counting from the organs' an 
adjective of 'the Dweller in the body', and omits the 
portion, 'is tu, however...buddheh, to the intellect'.-
Tr.] 
3.43 [The Ast, introdcues this verse with, 'Tatah 
kim, what follows from that?'-Tr.] Understanding 
the Self thus [Understanding...thus:that desires can 
be conquered through the knowledge of the Self.] 
as superior to the intellect, and completely 
establishing (the Self) is spiritual absorption with 
the (help of) the mind, O mighty-armed one, 
vanquish the enemy in the form of desire, which is 
difficult to subdue. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
3.43 Buddhva, understanding; atmanam, the Self; 
evam, thus; as param, superior; buddheh, to the 
intellect; and samstabhya, completely establishing; 
atmana, with the mind, i.e. establishing (the Self) 
fully in spiritual absorption with the help of your 
own purified mind; O mighty-armed one, jahi, 
vanquish; this satrum, enemy; kama-rupam, in the 
form of desire; which is durasadam, difficult to 
subdue-which can be got hold of with great 
difficulty, it being possessed of many inscrutable 
characteristics. 
4.1 The Blessed Lord said -- I imparted this 
imperishable Yoga to Vivasvan, Vivasvan taught 
this to Manu, and Manu transmitted this to 
Iksavaku. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.1 In the beginning of creation, with a veiw to 
infusing vigour into the Ksatriyas who are the 
protectors of the world, aham, I; proktavan, 
imparted; imam, this; avyayam, imperishable; 
yogam, Yoga, presented in the (preceding) two 
chapters; vivasvate, to Vivasvan, the Sun. Being 
endowed with this power of Yoga, they would be 
able to protect the Brahmana caste. The protection 
of the world becomes ensured when the 
Brahmanas and the Ksatriyas are protected. It (this 
Yoga) is avyayam, imperishable, because its result 
is undecaying. For, the result-called Liberation-of 
this (Yoga), which is characterized by steadfastness 
in perfect Illumination, does not decay. And he, 
Vivasvan, praha, taught (this); manave, to Manu. 
Manu abravit, transmitted (this); iksvakave, to 
Iksvaku, his own son who was the first king. [First 
king of the Iksvaku dynasty, otherwise known as 
the Solar dynasty.] 
4.2 The king-sages knew this (yoga) which was 
received thus in regular succession. That Yoga, O 
destroyer of foes, in now lost owing to a long lapse 
of time. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.2 Rajarsayah, the king-sages, those who were 
kings and sages (at the same time); viduh, knew; 
imam, this Yoga; which was evam parampara praptam, received thus through a regular 
succession of Ksatriyas. Sah, that; yogah, Yoga; 
nastah, is lost, has go its traditional line snapped; 
iha, now; mahata kalena, owing to a long lapse of 
time. parantapa, O destroyer of foes. By para are 
meant those against oneself. He who, like the sun, 
'scorches' (tapayati) them by the 'rays' of the 'heat' 
of his prowess is parantapa, i.e. scorcher of 
antagonists. Noticing that the Yoga has got lost by 
reaching people who are weak and have no control 
of their organs, and that the world has become 
associated with goals that do not lead to 
Liberation, 
4.3 That ancient Yoga itself, which is this, has been 
taught to you by Me today, considering that you 
are My devotee and friend, For, this (Yoga) is a 
profound secret. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.3 Sah, that; puratanah, ancient; yogah, Yoga; eva, 
itself; ayam, which is this; proktah, has been 
taught; te, to you; maya, by Me; adya, today; iti, 
considering that; asi, you are; me, My; bhaktah, 
devotee; ca sakha, and friend. Hi, for; etat, this 
Yoga, i.e. Knowledge; is a uttamam, profound; 
rahasyam, secret. Lest someone should understand 
that the Lord has said something contradictory, 
therefore, in order to prevent that (doubt), as 
though raising a question, 
4.4 Arjuna said -- Your birth was later, (whereas) 
the birth of Vivasvan was earlier. How am I to 
understand this that You instructed (him) in the 
beginning? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.4 Bhavatah, Your; janma, was aparam, later, in 
the abode of Vasudeva; (whereas) the birth 
vivasvatah, of Visvasvan, the Sun; was param, 
earlier, in the beginning of creation. Therefore, 
katham, how; vijanyam, am I to understand; etat, 
this, as not inconsistent; iti, that; tvam, You, 
yourself; who proktavan, insturcted this Yoga; 
adau, in the beginning, are the same person who 
are now teaching me? By way of demolishing the 
doubt of fools with regard to Vasudeva, that He 
has no God-hood and omniscience-to which very 
purpose was Arjuna's question 4.5 The Blessed Lord said -- O Arjuna, many lives 
of Mine have passed, and so have yours. I know 
them all, (but) you know not, O scorcher of 
enemies! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.5 O Arjuna, bahuni, many; janmani, lives; me, of 
Mine; vyatitani, have passed; tava ca, and so have 
yours. Aham, I; veda know; tani, them; sarvani, all; 
(but) tvam, you; va vetta, know not, due to your 
power of understanding being obstructed by 
righteousness, unrighteousness, etc. However, 
parantapa, O scorcher of foes; aham, I know, 
possessing as I do unobstructed power of 
knowledge, because by nature I am enternal, pure, 
enlightened and free. 'In that case, how, in spite of 
the absence of righteousness and unrighteousness, 
can there be any birth for You who are the eternal 
God?' That is beng answered: 
4.6 Though I am birthless, undecaying by nature, 
and the Lord of beings, (still) by subjugating My 
Prakriti, I take birth by means of My own Maya. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.6 Api, san ajah, though I am birthless; and 
avyayatma, undecaying by nature, though I am 
naturally possessed of an undiminishing power of 
Knowledge; and so also api san, though; isvarah, 
the Lord, natural Ruler; bhutanam, of beings, from 
Brahma to a clump of grass; (still) adhisthaya, by 
subjugating; svam, My own; prakrtim, Prakrti, the 
Maya of Visnu consisting of the three gunas, under 
whose; spell the whole world exists, and deluded 
by which one does not know one's own Self, 
Vasudeva;-by subjugating that Prakrti of Mine, 
sambhavami, I take birth, appear to become 
embodeid, as though born; atma-mayaya, by 
means of My own Maya; but not in reality like an 
ordinary man. It is being stated when and why that 
birth occurs: 
4.7 O scion of the Bharata dynasty, whenever there 
is a decline one virtue and increase of vice, then do 
I manifest Myself. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.7 O scion of the Bharata dynasty, yada yada hi, 
whenever; bhavati, there is; a glanih, decline, 
decrease; dharmasya, of virtue consisting of the 
duties of castes and stages of life of living beings, 
which are the means to achieving properity and 
Liberation; and abhyutthanam, increase, rise; 
adharmasya, of vice; tada, then; do aham, I; srjami, 
manifest; atmanam, Myself, through Maya. Why?
4.8 For the protection of the pious, the destruction 
of the evil-doers, and establishing virtue, I manifest 
Myself in every age. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.8 Paritranaya, for the protection; sadhunam, of 
the pious, the followers of the virtuous path; 
vinasaya, for the destruction; duskrtam, of the evil doers, of the sinful ones; and also 
dharmasamsthapanarthaya, for establishing virtue 
fully;-for that purpose, sambhavami, I manifest 
Myself; yuge yuge, in every age. 
4.9 He who thus knows truly the divine birth and 
actions of Mine does not get rebirth after casting 
off the body. He attains Me, O Arjuna. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.9 Yah, he who; evam, thus, as described; vetti, 
knows tattvatah, truly, as they are in reality; that 
divyam, divine, supernatural; janma, birth, which 
is a form of Maya; ca karma, and actions, such as 
protection of the pious, etc.; mama, of Mine; na eti,
does not get; punarjanma, rebirth; tyaktva, after 
casting off; this deham, body. Sah, he; eti, attains, 
comes to; mam, Me-he gets Liberated, O Arjuna. 
This path of Liberation has not been opened 
recently. What then? Even in earlier days 
4.10 Many who were devoid of attachment, fear 
and anger, who were absorbed in Me, who had 
taken refuge in Me, and were purified by the 
austerity of Knowledge, have attained My state. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.10 Bahavah, many; vita-raga-bhaya-krodhah, 
who were devoid of attachment, fear and anger; 
manmayah, who were absorbed in Me, who were 
knowers of Brahman, who were seers of (their) 
identity with God; mam upasrithah, who had 
taken refuge only in Me, the supreme God, i.e. who 
were steadfast in Knowledge alone; and were 
putah, purified, who had become supremely 
sanctified; jnana-tapasa, by the austerity of 
Knowledge-Knowledge itself, about the supreme 
Reality, being the austerity; becoming sanctified by 
that austerity of Knowledge-; agatah, have 
attained; madbhavam, My state, Goodhood, 
Liberation. The particular mention of 'the austerity 
of Knowledge' is to indicate that steadfastness in 
Knowledge does not depend on any other 
austerity. 'In that case, You have love and aversion, 
because of which You grant the state of identity 
with Yourself only to a few but not to others?' The 
answer is: 
4.11 According to the manner in which they 
approach Me, I favour them in that very manner. O 
son of Partha, human beings follow My path in 
every way. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.11 Yatha, according to the manner in which, the 
purpose for which, seeking, whatever fruit; 
prapadyante, they approach; mam, Me; aham, I; 
bhajami, favour; tan, them; tatha eva, in that very 
manner, by granting that fruit. This is the idea. For 
they are not seekers of Liberation. It is certainly 
impossible for the same person to be a seeker of 
Liberation and, at the same time, a seeker of 
rewards (of actions). Therefore, by granting fruits 
to those who hanker after fruits; by granting 
Knowledge to those who follow what has been 
stated (in the scriptures) and are seekers of 
Liberation, but do not hanker after rewards; and by 
granting Liberation to those who are men of 
wisdom and are monks aspiring for Liberation; 
and so also by removing the miseries of those who 
suffer- in these ways I favour them just according 
to the manner, in which they approach Me. This is 
the meaning. On the other hand, I do not favour 
anybody out of love or aversion, or out of delusion. 
Under all circumstances, O son of Prtha, 
manusyah, human beings; anuvartante, follow; 
sarvasah, in every way; mama, My; vartma, path, 
[The paths characterized by Knowledge and by 
action (rites and duties).] the path of God who am 
omnipresent. By 'human beings' are meant those 
people who become engaged in their respective 
duties to which they are qualified according to the 
results they seek. 'If Your wish to be favourable is 
the same towards all creatures on account of the 
absence of the defects of love and aversion in You 
who are God, and You are there with Your 
capacity to grant all rewards, why then do not all, 
becoming desirous of Liberation, take refuge in 
You alone with the very knowledge that Vasudeva 
is everything?' As to that, hear the reason for this: 
4.12 Longing for the fruition of actions (of their 
rites and duties), they worship the gods here. For, 
in the human world, success from action comes 
quickly. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.12 Kanksantah, longing for, praying for; siddim, 
fruition, fructification of the results; karmanam, of 
actions; yajante, they worship; iha, here, in this 
world; devatah, the gods, Indra, Fire and others which accords with the Upanisadic text, 'While he 
who worships another god thinking, "He is one, 
and I am another," does not know. He is like an 
animal to the gods' (Br. 1.4.10). [This text points out 
that the reason for adoring other deties is the 
ignorance of the Self, which gives rise to the ideas 
of difference between the worshipped and the 
worshipper. As animals are beneficial to human 
beings, so also is the sacrificer to the gods, because 
through oblations he works for their pleasure!] Hi, 
for, in the case of those, indeed, who sacrifice to 
other gods and long for results; (siddhih, success; 
karmaja, from action;) bhavati, comes; ksiparm, 
quickly; manuse-loke, in the human world, 
because the authority of the scriptures extends 
only over the human world. By the specific 
statement, 'For, in the human world, success comes 
quickly,' the Lord shows that results of actions can 
accrue even in the other worlds. The difference lies 
in this that, in the human world eligibility for [Ast. 
and A.A. omit 'adhikara, elegibility for', and read 
karmani.-Tr.] actions is according to castes, stages 
of life, etc. The fruition of the results of those 
actions of persons who are eligible according to 
castes, stages of life, etc. comes quickly. What is the 
reason for the rule that the competence for rites 
and duties according to castes, stages of life, etc. 
obtains only in the human world, but not in the 
other worlds? Or:-It has been said, 'Human beings, 
having such divisions as castes, stages of life, etc., 
follow My path in every way.' For what reason, 
again, do they as a rule follow Your path alone, but 
not of others? This is being answered: 
4.13 The four castes have been created by Me 
through a classification of the gunas and duties. 
Even though I am the agent of that (act of 
classification), still know Me to be a non-agent and 
changeless. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.13 Catur-varnyam-meaning the same as catvarah 
varnah, the four castes; srstam, have been created; 
maya, by Me who am God, which accords with 
such Vedic texts as, 'The Brahmanas were His 
face...' (Rg. 10.90.12); guna-karma-vibhagasah, 
through a classification of the gunas and duties. 
[A.G. writes: guna-vibhagena karma-vibhagah, 
classification of the duties, determined by the 
classification of the gunas.-Tr] By the gunas are 
meant sattva, rajas and tamas (see note under 2.45; 
also see Chapter 14). As to that, the control of the 
mind and body, austerity, etc. are the duties of the 
Brahmanas, who are sattvika, i.e. have a 
predominance of the quality of sattva (purity, 
goodness, etc.). Courage, valour, etc. are the duties 
of the Ksatriyas, in whom sattva becomes 
secondary and rajas (passion, attachment, etc.) 
preponderates. Agriculture etc. are the duties of 
the Vaisya, in whom tamas (indolence, ignorance, 
etc.) is secondary and rajas is predominant. Service 
is the only duty of the Sudra, in whom rajas is 
secondary and tamas predominates (see chapters 
14, 16,17 and 18). In this way, the four castes have 
been created by Me through a classification of the 
gunas and duties. This is the idea. And these four 
castes do not prevail in the other worlds. Hence the 
specification, 'in the human world'. 'Well, in that 
caste, by virtues of Your being he agent of the acts 
of creation of the four castes,etc. You become 
subject tothe consequence of those actions? 
Therefore you are not eternally free and the eternal 
Lord!' This is being answered: Api, even though; I 
am kartaram, the agent; tasya, of that act, from the 
empirical standpoint of maya; still, from the 
highest standpoint, viddhi, know; mam, Me; to be 
akartaram, a non-agent; and therefore, also know 
Me to be avyayam, changeless, not subject to the 
cycle of births and deaths. 'In reality, however, I 
am not the agent of those actions of which you 
think I am the agent.' Because -- 
4.14 Actions do not taint Me; for Me there is no 
hankering for the results of actions. One who 
knows Me thus, does not become bound by 
actions. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.14 Because of the absence of egoism, those 
karmani, actions; na limpanti, do not taint; mam, 
Me, by becoming the originators of body etc. And 
me, for Me; na sprha, there is no hankering for the 
results of those actions. But in the case of 
transmigrating beings, who have self-identification 
in the form, 'I am the agent', and thirst for actions 
as also for their results, it is reasonable that actions 
should taint them. Owing to the absence of these, 
actions do not taint Me. Anyone else, too, yah, 
who; abhijanati, knows; mam, Me; iti, thus, as his 
own Self, and (knows), 'I am not an agent; I have 
no hankering for the results of actions'; sah, he; na 
badhyate, does not become bound; karmabhih, by 
actions. In his case also actions cease to be the 
originators of body etc. This is the import. 
4.15 Having known thus, duties were performed 
even by the ancient seekers of Liberation. 
Thererfore you undertake action itself as was 
performed earlier by the ancient ones. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.15 Jnatva, having known; evam, thus, that 'I am 
not an agent; I have no desire for the results of 
actions'; karma, duties; krtam, were undertaken; 
api, even; purvaih, by the ancient; mumuksubhih, 
seekers of Liberation. Tasmat, therefore; tvam, you; 
kuru, undertake; karma, action; eva, itself. You 
ought not to sit quietly, or even renounce. 
Therefore, you (undertake actions) because they 
were performed by the ancients as well-if you have 
no Self-knowledge, then (undertake actions) for 
self-purification; or, if you have Self-knowledge, 
then (undertake actions) in order to prevent people 
from going astray-, as were krtam, performed; 
purvataram, earlier; purvaih, by the ancient ones, 
Janaka and others; not actions as are undertaken in 
the present day. [This last portion of the sentence is 
translated by some as follows: You should not 
undertake actions which are done in the present 
manner (i.e. do not perform actions in the manner 
undertakne by people nowadays, which neither 
purifies the mind nor helps people). (See G1. Pr. p.114.) 
'If action has to be undertaken here, then I 
shall do so following Your instruction itself. What 
is the use of specifying that it was done earlier by 
the ancient ones?' 'The answer is: Because there is a 
great difficult as regards actions.' How? 
4.16 Even the intelligent are confounded as to what 
is action and what is inaction. I shall tell you of that 
action by knowing which you will become free 
from evil. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.16 Kavayah api, even the intelligent; mohitah, are 
confounded in this subject of action etc.; iti atra, as 
to; kim karma, what is action; and kim akarma, 
what is inaction. Therefore, pravaksyami, I shall 
tell; te, you; of karma, action; akarma ca, as also of 
inaction; jnatva, by knowing; yat, which-action etc.; 
moksyase, you will become free: asubhat, from 
evil, from transmigration. 'And you should not 
think thus: What is called karma is the movement 
of the body etc. as are well-known in the world; 
and akarma, inaction, is not doing those, (i.e.) 
sitting quietly. What is there to understand 
(further) in that regard?' 'Why?' The answer is: 
4.17 For there is something to be known even about 
action, and something to be known about 
prohibited action; and something has to be known 
about inaction. The true nature of action is 
inscrutable. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.17 Hi, for; there is something boddhavyam, to be 
known; api, even; karmanah, about action enjoined 
by the scriptures; and there is certainly something 
to be known vikarmanah, about prohibited action; 
so, also, there is something to be known 
akarmanah, about inaction, about sitting quietly. 
(The words 'there is' are to be supplied in all the 
three cases.) Because gatih, the true nature, i.e. the
essential nature; karmanah, of action-implying 
karma etc., viz action, prohibited action and 
inaction; is gahana, inscrutable, hard to 
understand. 'What, again, is the essential nature of 
action etc. which has to be understood, and about 
which it was promised, "I shall tell you..." (16)?' 
This is being stated: 
4.18 He who finds inaction in action, and action in 
inaction, he is the wise one [Possessed of the 
knowledge of Brahman] among men; he is engaged 
in yoga and is a performer of all actions! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.18 Since engagement and non-engagement (in 
action) depend on an agent, therefore, yah, he who; 
pasyet, ie. pasyati, finds; akarma, inaction, absence 
of action; karmani, in action-karma means 
whatever is done, action in general; in tha action-; 
and yah, who; finds karma, action; akarmani, in 
inaction, in the absence of action; sah, he; is 
buddhiman, a wise one; manusyesu, among men. 
All dealings involving an act, accessories, etc. exist 
certainly on the plane of ignorance, [Both 
engagement and non-engagement presuppose 
agentship and an act of some kind. This, however, 
holds good on the plane of ignorance, but not on 
that of Self-realization.] only so long as one has not 
attained to the Reality. He is a yogi, yuktah, 
engaged in yoga; and a krtsna-karma-krt, 
performer of all actions. One who discriminates 
between action and actions. One who discriminates 
between action and inaction is praised thus. 
Objection: Well, what is meant by this 
contradictory statement, 'He who finds inaction in 
action', and 'action in inaction'? For action cannot 
become inaction, nor inaction action. That being so, 
how can a witness have (such) an incongruous 
perception? Vedantin: Is it not that [Ast. reads na 
in place of nanu.-Tr.] to an ordinary foolsih 
observer, that which is reality is inaction appears 
as action, and similarly, action itself as inaction? 
That being so, in order to show things as they are 
the Lord says, 'He who finds inaction in action', etc. 
Therefore there is no incongruity. Besides, the 
qualifications such as 'intelligent' etc. (thus) 
become logical. And by saying, 'there is something 
to be known', is implied the perception of things as 
they are. Moreover, freedom from evil cannot 
follow from an erroneous perception; whereas it 
has been said, 'by knowing which you will become 
free from evil'. Therefore, one account of action 
and inaction being perceived contrarily by the 
creatures, the Lord's utterance, 'he who finds 
inaction in action,' etc. is for dispelling their 
contrary perception. Not that in the empirical 
plane inaction has action as its receptacle, like a 
plum in a bowl! Nor even has action inaction as its 
receptacle, because inaction is a negation of action. 
Therefore, action and inaction are actually 
perceived contrarily by the ordinary persons-like 
seeing water in a mirage, or silver in nacre. 
Objection: Is it not that to every one action is action 
itself? Never is there an exception to this. Vedantin: 
That is not so, becuase when a boat is moving, 
motionless trees on the bank appear to move in the 
opposite direction to a man on the boat; an absence 
of motion is noticed in distant moving things 
which are not near one's eyes. Similarly, here also 
occurs the contrary perceptions, viz seeing action 
in inaction under the idea, 'I am doing', [Ast. omits 
'aham karomi iti, under the idea, "I am doing"'.-Tr.] 
and seeing, inaction in acion,-because of which it is 
said, 'He who finds inaction in action,' etc. in order 
to eliminate them. As such, although this answer 
has been given more than once, still a man 
becomes repeatedly deluded under the influence of 
a totally opposite perception. And forgetting the 
truth that has been heard again and again, he 
repeatedly raises false issues and questions! And 
therefore, observing that the subject is difficult to 
understand, the Lord gives His answer again and 
again. The absence of action in the Self-well-known 
from the Vedas, Smrtis and logic, as stated in, '(It is 
said that) This is unmanifest; This is inconceivable' 
(2.25), 'Never is this One born, and never does It 
die' (2.20; Ka. 1.2.18), etc.-has been and will be 
spoken of. The contrary perception of action in that 
actionless Self, i.e. in inaction, is very deep-rooted, 
owing to which 'even the intelligent are 
confounded as to what is action and what is 
inaction.' And as a consequence of the 
superimposition of aciton pertaining to the body 
etc. on the Self, there arises such ideas as, 'I am an 
agent; this is my action; its result is to be enjoyed 
by me.' Similarly, with the idea, 'I shall remain 
quiet, whereby I shall be free from exertion, free 
from activity, and happy', and superimposing on 
the Self the cessation of activities pertaining to the 
body and organs and the resulting happiness, a
man imagines, 'I shall not do anything; I shall sit 
quietly and happily.' That being so, the Lord says, 
'he who finds inaction in action,' etc. with a view to 
removing this contrary understanding of man. And 
here in this world, though action belonging to the 
body and organs continues to be action, still it is 
superimposed by everyone on the acitonless, 
unchanging Self, as a result of which even a 
learned person things, 'I act.' Therefore, in action 
(karmani), which is universally considered by all 
people to be inherent in the Self, like the perception 
of motion in the (stationary) trees on the bank of a 
river-(in that action) he who contrariwise finds the 
fact of inaction, like perceiving absence of motion 
in those trees-. And, in inaction (akarmani) in the
cessation of the activities pertaining to the body 
and organs and ascribed to the Self in the same 
way that actions are ascribed-, in that action, he 
who sees action because of egoism being implicit in 
the idea, 'I am happily seated quietly, without 
doing anything'-; he who knows thus the 
distinction between action and inaction, is wise, is 
learned among men; he is engaged in yoga, he is a 
yogi, and a performer of all actions. And he, freed 
from evil, attains fulfilment. This is the meaning. 
This verse is interpreted by some in another way. 
How? (Thus:) 'Since the daily obligatory duties 
(nityakarmas) certainly have no results when 
performed as a dedication to God, therefore, in a 
secondary sense, they are said to be inaction. 
Again, the non-performance of these (nitya-
karmas) is inaction; since this produces an evil 
result, therefore it is called action, verily in a 
figurative sense. That being so, he who sees 
inaction in the daily obligatory duties (nitya karmas) owing to the obsence of their results-in the 
same way as a cow that does not yield milk is said 
to be not a cow, though in reality it is so-so also, in 
the non-performance of the daily obligatory duties, 
i.e. in inaction, he who sees action since that yields 
results such as hell etc...' This explanation is not 
logical, because freedom from evil as a result of 
such knowledge is unreasonable, and the utterance 
of the Lord in the sentence, '...by knowing which 
you will become freed from evil', will be 
contradicted. How? Even if it be that liberation 
from evil follows from the performance of nitya karmas, it cannot, however, follow from the 
knowledge of the absence of their results. For it has 
not been enjoined (anywhere) that knowledge of 
the nityakarmas (themselves), leads to the result of 
freedom from evil. Nor has this been stated here by 
the Lord Himself. Hereby is refuted the 'seeing of 
action in inaction' [As explained by others.-Tr.], for 
(according to the opponent) 'seeing of action in 
inaction' has not been enjoined here [Here, in the 
present verse.] as a duty, but (what has been 
enjoined is) merely that performance of the 
nityakarmas is obligatory. Moreover, no result can 
accrue from the knowledge that evil arises from 
non-performance of nityakramas. Nor even has 
non-performance of nityakarmas. been enjoined as 
something that should be known. Besides, such 
results as freedom from evil, wisdom, engagement 
in yoga, and being a performer of all actions cannot 
reasonably follow from a false perception of action 
as inaction. Nor is this a eulogy of false perception. 
[The stated results accrue from correct knowledge, 
not from false perception; and correct knowledge 
alone is praise-worthy.] Indeed, false perception is 
itself an abvious form of evil! How can it bring 
about liberation from another evil? Surely, 
darkness does not become the remover of 
darkness! Opponent: Well, the seeing of inaction in 
action, or the seeing of action in inaction-that is not 
a false perception. Vadantin: What then? 
Opponent: It is a figurative statement based on the 
existence or the non-existence of results. Vedantin: 
Not so, because there is no such scriptural 
statement that something results from knowing 
action as inaction and inaction as action, even in a 
figurative sense. Besides, nothing particular is 
gained by rejecting what is heard of (in the 
scriptures) and imagining something that is not. 
Further, it was possible (for the Lord) to express in 
His own words that there is no result from the 
nityakarmas, and that by their non-performance 
one would have to go to hell. Under such 
circumstances, what was the need of the 
ambiguous statement, 'He who sees inaction in 
action,' etc., which is misleading to others? This 
being the case, such an explanation by anyone will 
be clearly tantamount to imagining that statement 
of the Lord as meant for deluding people. 
Moreover, this subject-matter (performance of 
nityakarmas) is not something to be protected with 
mystifying words. It is not even logical to say that 
the subject-matter will become easy for 
comprehension if it is stated again and again 
through different words. For, the subject-matter 
that was stated more clearly in, 'Your right is for 
action alone' (2.47), does not need any repetition. 
And everwhere it is said that whatever is good and 
ought to be practised deserves to be understood; 
anything purposeloss does not deserve to be 
known. Besides, neither is false knowledge worth 
acquiring nor is the semblance of an object 
presented by it worth knowing. Nor even can any 
evil, which is an entity, arise from the non performance of nityakarmas, which is a non-entity, 
for there is the statement, 'Of the unreal there is no 
being' (2.16), and (in the Upanisad) it has been 
pointed out, 'How can existence originate from 
nonexistence?' (Ch. 4.2.2). Since emergence of the 
existent from the nonexistent has been denied, 
therefore anyone's assertion that the existent 
originates from the nonexistent will amount to 
saying that a non-entity becomes an entity, and an 
entity becomes a non-entity! And that is not 
rational because it runs counter to all the means of 
valid knowledge. Further, the scriptures cannot 
enjoin fruitless actions, they being naturally 
painful; and it is illogical that what is painful 
should be done intentionally. Also, if it is admitted 
that falling into hell results from their non performance (i.e. of the nityakarmas), then that too 
is surely a source of evil. In either case, whether 
one undertakes them or not, the scriptures will be 
imagined to be useless. And there will be a 
contradiction with your own standpoint when, 
after holding that the nityakarmas are fruitless, you 
assert that they lead to Liberation. Therefore, the 
meaning of 'He who finds inaction in action,' etc. is 
just what stands out literally. And the verse has 
been explained by us accordingly. The aforesaid 
perception of 'inaction in action,' etc. is being 
praised: 
4.19 The wise call him learned whose actions are all 
devoid of desires and their thougts, [Kama sankalpa is variously translated as 'desires and 
purposes', 'plans and desires for results', 
'hankering for desires', etc. But Sankarcarya shows 
sankalpa as the cause of kama. -Tr.] and whose 
actions have been burnt away by the fire of 
wisdom. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.19 Budhah, the wise, the knowers of Brahman; 
ahuh, call; tam, him; panditam, learned, in the real 
sense; yasya, whose, of the one who perceives as 
stated above; samarambhah, actions-whatever are 
undertaken; are sarve, all; kama-sankalpa-varjitah, 
devoid of desires and the thoughts which are their 
(desires') causes (see 2.62)-i.e., (those actions) are 
performed as mere movements, without any selfish 
purpose: if they are performed by one (already) 
engaged in actions, then they are for preventing 
people from going astray, and if they are done by 
one who has withdrawn from actions, then they 
are merely for the maintenance of the body-; and 
jnanagni-dagdha-karmanam, whose actions have 
been burnt away by the fire of wisdom. Finding 
inaction etc. in action etc. is jnana, wisdom; that 
itself is agnih, fire. He whose actions, karma, 
described as good and bad, have been dagdhani, 
burnt away by that fire of wisdom, is jnana-agni dagdha-karma. However, one who is a perceiver of 
'inaction' etc. [Perceiver of inaction etc.: He who 
knows the truth about action and inaction as 
explained before.-Tr.] is free from actions owing to 
the very fact of his seeing 'inaction' etc. He is a 
monk, who acts merely for the purpose of 
maintaining the body. Being so, he does not engage 
in actions although he might have done so before 
the dawn of discrimination. He again who, having 
been engaged in actions under the influence of past 
tendencies, later on becomes endowed with the 
fullest Self-knowledge, he surely renounces (all) 
[Ast. adds this word sarva, all.-Tr.] actions along 
with their accessories as he does nnot find any 
purpose in activity. For some reason, if it becomes 
impossible to renounce actions and he, for the sake 
of preventing people from going astray, even 
remains engaged as before in actions-without 
attachment to those actions and their results 
because of the absence of any selfish purpose-, still 
he surely does nothing at all! His actions verily 
become 'inaction' because of having been burnt 
away by the fire of wisdom. By way of pointing 
out this idea, the Lord says: 
4.20 Having given up attachment to the results of 
action, he who is ever-contented, dependent on 
nothing, he really does not do anything even 
though engaged in action. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.20 With the help of the above-mentioned 
wisdom, tyaktva, having given up the idea of 
agentship; and phala-asangam, attachment to the 
results of action; he who is nitya-trptah, ever trptah, ever-contented, i.e. has no hankering for 
objects; and nirasrayah, dependent on nothing-. 
Asraya means that on which a person leans, 
desiring to achieve some human goal. The idea is 
that he is dependent of any support which may be 
a means of attaining some coveted seen or unseen 
result. In reality, actions done by a man of 
Knowledge are certainly inactions, since he is 
endowed with the realization of the actionless Self. 
Actions together with their accessories must be 
relinquished by one who has become thus, because 
they have no end to serve. This being so, api, even 
though; he remains abhi-pravrttah, engaged as 
before; karmani, in actions-getting out of those 
(actions) being impossible-, either with the 
intention of preventing people from going astray 
or with a view to avoiding the censure of the wise
people; sah, he; eva, really; na karoti, does not do; 
kincit, anything, because he is endued with the 
realization of the actionless Self. [From the 
subjective standpoint of the enlightened there are 
no actions, but ordinary people mistakenly think 
them to be actions, which in reality are a mere 
semblance of it.] On the other hand, one who is the 
opposite of the above-mentioned one, (and) in 
whom, even before undertaking works, has 
dawned the realization of his identity with 
Brahman, the all-pervasive, inmost, actionless Self; 
who,being bereft of solicitation for desirable objects 
seen or unseen, has renounced actions along with 
their accessories, by virtue of seeing no purpose to 
be served by undertaking actions meant to secure 
some seen or unseen result, and makes effort only 
for the maintenance of the body, he, the monk 
steadfast in Knowledge, becomes free. Hence, in 
order to express this idea the Lord says: 
4.21 One who is without solicitation, who has the 
mind and organs under control, (and) is totally 
without possessions, he incurs no sin by 
performing actions merely for the (maintenance of 
the) body. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.21 Nirasih, one who is without solicitation-one 
from whom asisah [Asih is a kind of desire that can 
be classed under prayer. (Some translate it as 
desire, hope.-Tr.)], solicitations, have departed; 
yata-citta-atma, who has the mind and organs 
under control-one by whom have been controlled 
(yatau) both the internal organ (citta) and the 
external aggregate of body and organs (atma); 
(and) is tyakta-sarva-parigrahah, [ Parigraha: 
receiving, accepting, possessions, belongings.-
V.S.A] totally without possessions- one by whom 
have been renounced (tyaktah) all (sarvah) 
possessions (parigrahah); na apnoti, he does not 
incur; kilbisam, sin, in the form of evil as also 
rigtheousness-to one aspiring for Liberation, even 
righteousness is surely an evil because it brings 
bondage-; [Here Ast. adds tasmat tabhyam mukto 
bhavati samsarat mukto bhavati ityarthah, 
therefore, he becomes free from both of them, i.e. 
he becomes liberated from transmigration.-Tr.] 
kurvan, by performing; karma, actions; kevalam, 
merely; sariram, for the purpose of maintaining the 
body-without the idea of agenship even with 
regard to these (actions). Further, in the expression, 
'kevalam sariram karma', do the words sariram 
karma mean 'actions done by the body' or 'actions 
merely for the purpose of maintaining the body? 
Again, what does it matter if by (the words) 
sariram karma is meant 'actions done by the body' 
or 'actions merely for the purpose of maintaning 
the body? The answer is: If by sariram karma is 
meant actions done by the body, then it will 
amount to a contradiction [Contradiction of the 
scriptures.] when the Lord says, 'one does not 
incur sin by doing with his body any action meant 
for seen or unseen purposes, even though it be 
prohibited.' Even if the Lord were to say that 'one 
does not incur sin by doing with his body some 
scripturally sanctioned action intended to secure a 
seen or an unseen end', then there arises the 
contingency of His denying something (some evil) 
that has not come into being! (Further,) from the 
specification, sariram karma kurvan (by doing 
actions with the body), and from the use of the 
word kevala (only), it will amount to saying that 
one incurs sin by performing actions, called 
righteous and unrighteous, which can be 
accomplished with the mind and speech and which 
come within the purview of injunction and 
prohibition. Even there, the statement that one 
incurs sin by performing enjoined actions through 
the mind and speech will involve a contradiction; 
even in the case of doing what is prohibited, it will 
amount to a mere purposeless restatement of a 
known fact. On the other hand, when the sense 
conveyed by sariram karma is taken as acctions 
merely for the purpose of maintaining the body, 
then the implication will be that he does not do any 
other work as can be accomplished physically, 
orally, or mentally, which are known from 
injunctions and prohibitions (of the scriptures) and 
which have in view seen or unseen results; while 
he appears to people to be working with those very 
body (speech) etc. merely for the purpose of 
maintaining the body, yet he does not incur sin by 
merely making movements of the body etc., 
because from the use of the word kevala, (merely) 
it follows that he is devoid of the sense of 
agentship implicit in the idea, 'I do.' Since there is 
no possibility of a person who has reached such a 
state incurring evil as suggest by the word sin, 
therefore he does not become subject to the evil of 
transmigration. That is to say, he certainly becomes 
free without any obstacle since he has all his 
actions burnt away by the fire of wisdom. This 
verse is only a reiteration of the result of full 
illumination stated earlier. It becomes faultless by 
accepting the interpretation of sariram karma thus. 
In the case of the monk who has renounced all 
possessions, since owning food etc. meant for the 
bare sustenance of the body is absent, therefore it 
becomes imperative to beg for alms etc. for the 
upkeep of the body. Under this circumstance, by 
way of pointing out the means of obtaining food 
etc. for the maintenance of the body of a monk as 
permitted by the text, 'What comes unasked for,
without forethought and spontaneously...' 
[Unasked for: what comes before the monk gets 
ready for going out for alms; without forethought: 
alms that are not given with abuses, and have not 
fallen on the ground, but collected from five or 
seven houses without any plan; spontaneously: 
alms brought to one spontaneously by devoted 
people.] (Bo. Sm. 21. 8. 12) etc., the Lord says: 
4.22 Remaining satisfied with what comes unasked 
for, having transcended the dualities, being free 
from spite, and equipoised under success and 
failure, he is not bound even by performing 
actions. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.22 Yadrccha-labha-santustah, remaining satisfied 
with what comes unasked for-yadrccha-labha 
means coming to possess something without 
having prayed for it; feeling contented with that-. 
Dvandva-atitah,having transcended the dualities one is said to be beyond dualities when his mind is 
not distressed even when afflicted by such 
opposites as heat and cold, etc.-. Vimatsarah, being 
free from spite, from the idea of enmity; and 
samah, equipoised; siddhau ca asiddhau, is success 
and failure, with regard to things that come 
unasked for-. The monk who is such, who is 
equipoised, not delighted or sorrowful in getting 
or not getting food etc. for the sustenance of the 
body, who sees inaction etc. in action etc., who is 
ever poised in the realization of the Self as It is, 
who, with regard to the activities accomplished by 
the body etc. in the course of going about for alms 
etc. for the bare maintenance of the body, is ever 
clearly conscious of the fact, 'I certainly do not 
anything; the organs act on the objects of the 
organs' (see 5.8; 3.28), he, realizing the absence of 
agentship in the Self, certainly does not do any 
actions like going about for alms etc. But when, 
abserving similarly with common human 
behaviour, agentship is attributed to him by 
ordinary poeple, then he (apparently) becomes an 
agent with regard to such actions as moving about 
for alms etc. However, from the standpoint of his 
own realization which has arisen from the valid 
means of knowledge presented in the scriptures, he 
is surely not an agent. He, to whom is thus 
ascribed agentship by others, na nibadhyate, is not 
bound; api, even; krtva, by performing such 
actions as moving about for alms merely for the 
maintenance of the body, because action which is a 
source of bondage has been burnt away along with 
its cause by the fire of wisdom. Thus, this is only a 
restatement of what has been said earilier. When a 
person who has already started works becomes 
endowed with the realization of the identity of the 
Self with the actionless Brahman, then it follows 
that in the case of that man, who has experienced 
the absence of agentship, actions and purposes in 
the Self, actions become relinquished. But if this 
becomes impossible for some reason and he 
continues to be engaged in those acitons as before, 
still he certainly does not do anything. This 
absence of action has been shown in the verse, 
'Having given up attachment to the results of 
action...' (20). Of that very person with regard to 
whom has been shown the absence of aciton 4.23 Of the liberated person who has got rid of 
attachment, whose mind is fixed in Knowledge, 
actions undertaken for a sacrifice get totally 
destroyed. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.23 Muktasya, of the liberated person who has 
become relieved of such bondages as righteousness 
and unrighteousness, etc.; gatasangasya, who has 
got rid of attachment, who has become detached 
from everything; jnana-avasthita-cetasah, whose 
mind is fixed in Knowledge only; his karma, 
actions; acaratah, undertaken; yajnaya, for a 
sacrifice, to accomplish a sacrifice [A.G. takes yajna 
to mean Visnu. So, yajnaya will mean 'for Visnu'. 
Sankaracarya also interprets this word similarly in 3.9.-Tr.]; 
praviliyate, gets destroyed; samagram, 
totally-saha (together) agrena (with its 
consequence, result). This is the meaning. For what 
reason, again, does an action that is underway get 
destroyed totally without producing its result? 
This is being answered: Because, 
4.24 The ladle is Brahman [Some translate as 
'Brahman is the ladle...,' etc.-Tr.], the oblations is 
Brahman, the offering is poured by Brahman in the 
fire of Brahman. Brahman alone is to be reached by 
him who has concentration on Brahman as the 
objective [As an object to be known and attained. 
(Some translate brahma-karma-samadhina as, 'by 
him who sees Brahman in action'.) 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.24 Brahma-arpanam, the ladle is Brahman: The 
knower of Brahman perceives the instrument with 
which he offers oblation in the fire as Brahman 
Itself. He perceives it as not existing separately 
from the Self, as one sees the non-existence of 
silver in nacre. In this sense it is that Brahman Itself 
is the ladle-just as what appears as silver is only 
narcre. (The two words brahma and arpanam are 
not parts of a compound word, samasa.) The 
meaning is that, to a knower of Brahman, what is 
perceived in the world as ladle is Brahman Itself. 
Similarly, brahma-havih, the oblations is Brahman: 
To him, what is seen as oblations is nothing but 
Brahman. In the same way, brahma-agnau, (-this is 
a compound word-) in the fire of Brahman: The fire 
into which oblation is hutam, poured; brahmana, 
by Brahman, by the agent, is Brahman Itself. The 
meaning is that Brahman Itself is the agent (of the 
offering). That he makes the offering-the act of 
offering-, that is also Brahman. And the result that 
is gantavyam, to be reached by him; that also is 
brahma eva, surely Brahman. Brahma-karma samadhina, by him who has concentration on 
Brahman as the objective: Brahman Itself is the 
objective (karma); he who has concentration 
(samadhi) on That is brahma-karma-samdhih. The 
goal to be reached by him is Brahman alone. Thus, 
even the action undertaken by one who desires to 
prevent mankind from going astray is in reality 
inaction, for it has been sublated by the realization 
of Brahman. This being so, in the case of the monk 
from whom aciton has dropped off, who has 
renounced all activity, viewing his Knowledge as a 
(kind of) sacrifice, too, becomes all the more 
justifiable from the point of view of praising full 
realization. That is, whatever is well known as 
ladle etc. in the context of a sacrifice, all that, in the 
context of the Self, is Brahman Itself to one who has 
realized the supreme Truth. If not so, then, since all 
in Brahman, it would have been uselesss to 
specifically mention ladle etc. as Brahman. 
Therefore, all actions cease to exist for the man of 
realization who knows that Brahman Itself is all 
this. And this follows also from the absence (in 
him) of the idea of accessories. [See note on p.211.-
Tr.] For the act called 'sacarifice' is not seen to exist 
without being in association with the idea of 
accessories. All such acts as Agnihotra etc. are
associated with the ideas of such accessories as 
making an offering etc. to the particular gods who 
are revealed in the scriptures, and with the idea of 
agentship as also desire for results. But they are not 
found bereft of the ideas of such distinctions as 
exist among action, accessories and results, or 
unassociated with the ideas of agentship hankering 
for results. This (apparent) (activity of the man of 
Knowledge), however, stands dissociated from the 
ideas of differences among the accessories like 
ladle etc., actions and results, which get destroyed 
by the Knowledge of Brahman. Hence, it is inaction 
to be sure. And thus has it been shown in, 'He who 
finds inaction in action' (18), 'he really does not do 
anything even though engaged in action' (20), 'the
organs act on the objects of the organs' (3.28), 
'Remaining absorbed in the Self, the knower of 
Reality should think, "I certainly do not do 
anything"' (5.8), etc. While pointing out thus, the 
Lord demolishes in various places the ideas of 
differences among actions, accessories and results. 
And it is also seen in the case of rites such as 
Agnihotra undertaken for results (kamya), that the 
Agnihotra etc. cease to be (kamya) rites undertaken 
for selfish motives when the desire for their results 
is destroyed. Similarly, it is seen that actions done 
intentionally and unintentionally yeild different 
results. So, here as well, in the case of one who has 
his ideas of distinctions among accessories like 
ladle etc., actions and results eliminated by the 
knowledge of Brahman, even activites which are 
merely external movements amount to inaction. 
Hence it was said, 'gets totally destroyed.' Here 
some say: That which is Brahman is the ladle etc. It 
is surely Brahman Itself which exists in the five 
forms [Asscessories that can be indicated by the 
five grammatical case-ending, viz Nominative, 
Objective, Instrumental, Dative and Locative. (As 
for instance, the sacrificer, oblation, ladle, 
sacrificial fire, and Brahman.-Tr.) of accessories 
such as the ladle etc. and it is Itself which 
undertakes actions. There the ideas of ladle etc. are 
not eradicated, but the idea of Brahman is 
attributed to the ladle etc. as one does the ideas of 
Visnu etc. to images etc., or as one does the idea of 
Brahman ot name etc. Reply: True, this could have 
been so as well if the context were not meant for 
the praise of jnanayajna (Knowledge considered as 
a sacrifice). Here, however, after presenting full 
realization as expressed by the word jnana-yajna, 
and the varieties of rites as referred to by the word 
yajna (sacrifice), Knowledge has been praised by 
the Lord in, 'Jnana-yajna (Knowledge considered 
as a sacrifice) is greater than sacrifices requiring 
materials' (33). And in the present context, this 
statement, 'the ladle is Brahman' etc., is capable of 
presenting Knowledge as a sacrifice; otherwise, 
since Brahman is everything, it will be purposeless 
to speak specially only of ladle etc. as Brahman. 
But those who maintain that one has to 
superimpose the idea of Brahman on the ladle etc., 
like superimposing the idea of Visnu and others on 
images etc. and of Brahman on name etc., for them 
the knowledge of Brahma stated (in the verse) 
cannot be the intended subject-matter dealt with 
here, because according to them ladle etc. are the 
(primary) objects of knowledge (in the context of 
the present verse). Besides, knowledge in the form 
of superimposition of an idea cannot lead to 
Liberation as its result; and what is said here is, 
'Brahman alone in to be realized by him'. Also, it is 
inconsistent to maintain that the result of 
Liberation can be achieved without full realization. 
And it goes against the context-the context being of 
full realization. This is supported by the fact that 
(the subject of ) full realization is introduced in the 
verse, 'He who finds inaction in action,' and at the 
end (of this chapter) the conclusion pertains to that 
very subject-matter. The chapter comes to a close 
by eulozing full realization itself in, 'Jnana-yajna 
(Knowledge considered as a sacrifice) is greater 
than sacrifices requiring materials', 'Achieving 
Knowledge, one...attains supreme Peace,' (39) etc. 
That being so, it is unjustifiable to suddenly say out 
of context that one has to superimpose the idea of 
Brahman on the ladle etc. like the superimposition 
of the idea of Visnu on images. Therefore this verse 
bears the meaing just as it has been already 
explained. As to that, after having presented 
Knowledge as a sacrifice, other sacrifices also are 
being mentioned now in, the verses beginning 
with, '(Other yogis undertake) sacrifice to gods 
alone,' etc., for eulogizing that Knowledge: 
4.25 Other yogis undertake sacrifice to gods alone, 
Others offer the Self, as a sacrifice by the Self itself, 
in the fire of Brahman. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.25 Apare, other; yoginah, yogis, ritualists; pari upasate, undertake; yajnam, sacrifice; daivam, to 
gods; eva, alone. A sacrifice by which the gods are 
adored is daiva-yajna; they perform only that. This 
is the meaning. Brahma-agnau, in the fire of 
Brahman: By the word brahman is meant That 
which is referred to in such sentences as, 'Brahman 
is Truth, knowledge and infinite' (Tai. 2.1), 
'Knowledge, Bliss, Brahman' (Br. 3.9.28), 'the 
Brahman that is immediate and direct-the self that 
is within all' (Br.3.4.1), which is devoid of all 
worldly characteristiscs like hunger etc. and which 
is beyond all particular qualifications-as stated in, 
'Not this, not this' (Br.4.4.22). That which is 
Brahman is the fire. [Brahman is called fire 
because, as reflected in wisdom, It burns away 
everything, i.e. ignorance, or because everything 
merges into It during dissolution (pralaya).] And it 
is spoken of as Brahmagni with a view to referring 
to It as that into which the offering is made. In that 
fire of Brahman, apare, others, other knowers of 
Brahman; upa-juhvati, offer; yajnam, the Self, 
which is referred to by the word yajna (sacrifice), it, 
having, been presented as a synonym of the Self;-
that Self, which is a sacrifice, which is reality is 
verily the supreme Brahman, which is associated 
with such limiting adjuncts as the intellect etc., 
which is associated with all the qualities of the 
limiting adjuncts superimposed on it, and which is 
the oblation, (they offer) yajnena, by the Self itself 
as described above. The offering (of the Self) in that 
(Brahman) is nothing but the realization of that Self 
which is assoicated with the limiting adjuncts to be 
the supreme Brahman which is free from adjuncts. 
The monks, steadfast in the realization of the 
identity of Brahman and the Self, make that 
offering. This is the meaning. Beginning with, 'The 
ladle is Brahman' etc., this sacrifice characterized as 
full realization is being included among such 
sacrifices as daiva-yajna etc. with a view to 
eulogizing it in the verses beginning with, 'O 
destroyer of enemies, jnana-yajna is greater than 
the sacrifices involving (sacrificial) materials'. 
4.26 Others offer the organs, viz ear etc., in the fires 
of self-control. Others offer the objects, viz sound 
etc., in the fires of the organs. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.26 Anye, others, other yogis; juhvati, offer; 
indriyani, the organs; viz srotradini, car etc.; 
samyama-agnisu, in the fires of self-control. The 
plural (in fires) is used because self-control is 
possible in respect of each of the organs. Self control itself is the fire. In that they make the 
offering, i.e. they practise control of the organs. 
anye, others; juhvati, offer; visayan, the objects; 
sabdadin, viz sound etc.; indriyagnisu, in the fires 
of the organs. The organs themselves are the fires. 
They make offerings in those fires with the organs 
of hearing etc. They consider the perception of 
objects not prohibited by the scriputures to be a 
sacrifice. 
4.27 Others offer all the activities of the organs and 
the activities of the vital force into the fire of the 
yoga of sel-control which has been lighted by 
Knowledge. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.27 Further, apare, others; juhvati, offer, i.e. 
merge; sarvani, all; indriya-karmani, the activities 
of the organs; and also the prana-karmani, 
activities of the vital force- prana means the air in 
the body; they offer its activities such as 
contraction, expansion, etc; atma-samyama yoga agnau, into the fire of the yoga of self-control-
withdrawal (samyama) [Samyama consists of 
concentration, meditation, and Self-absorption. The 
idea conveyed by the verse is that by stopping all 
activities, they concentrate the mind on the Self.] 
into the Self (atma) is self-control (atma-samyama); 
that itself is the fire of yoga (yoga-agni); (they 
offer) into that fire; jnana-dipite, which has been 
lighted by Knowledge, made to blaze up by 
discriminating knowledge, as if lighted up by oil. 
4.28 Similarly, others are performers of sacrifices 
through wealth, through austerity, through yoga, 
and through study and knowledge; others are 
ascetics with severe vows. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.28 Tatha, similarly; apare, others; are dravya yajnah, perfomers of sacrifices through wealth those sacrificers who spend wealth (dravya) in 
holy places under the idea of performing sacrifices; 
tapo-yajnah, performers of sacrifices through 
austerity, men of austerity, to whom austerity is a 
sacrifice; [This is according to Ast.-Tr.] yogayajnah, 
performers of sacrifice through yoga-those to 
whom the yoga consisting in the control of the vital 
forces, withdrawal of the organs, etc., is a sacrifice; 
and svadhyaya-jnana-yajnah, performers of 
sacrifices through study and knowledge. 
Sacrificers through study are those to whom the 
study of Rg-veda etc. accroding to rules is a 
sacrifice. And sacrificers through knowledge are 
those to whom proper understanding of the 
meaing of the scriptures is a sacrifice. Others are 
yatayah, ascetics, who are deligent; samsita-vratah, 
in following severe vows. Those whose vows 
(vratah) have been fully sharpened (samsita), made 
very rigid, are samsita-vratah. [Six kinds of 
sacrifices have been enumerated in this verse.] 
Further, 
4.29 Constantly practising control of the vital forces 
by stopping the movements of the outgoing and 
the incoming breaths, some offer as a sacrifice the 
outgoing breath in the incoming breath; while still 
others, the incoming breath in the outgoing breath. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.29 Pranayama-parayanah, constantly practising 
control of the vital forces-i.e. they practise a form of 
pranayama called Kumbhaka (stopping the breath 
either inside or outside) ['Three sorts of motion of 
Pranayama (control of the vital forces) are, one by 
which we draw the breath in, another by which we 
throw it out, and the third action is when the 
breath is held in the lungs or stopped from 
entering the lungs.'-C.W., Vol.I, 1962, p. 267. Thus, 
there are two kinds of Kumbhaka-internal and 
external.]-; prana-apana-gati ruddhva, by stopping 
the movements of the outgoing and the incoming 
breaths-the outgoing of breath (exhalation) 
through the mouth and the nostrils is the 
movement of the Prana; as opposed to that, the 
movement of Apana is the going down (of breath) 
(inhalation); these constitute the prana-apana-gati, 
movements of Prana and Apana; by stopping 
these; some juhvati, offer as a sacrifice; pranam, the 
outgoing breath, which is the function of Prana; 
apane, in the incoming breath, which is the 
function of Apana-i.e. they practised a form of 
pranayama called Puraka ('filling in'); while tatha 
apare, still others; offer apanam, the incoming 
breath; prane, in the outgoing breath, i.e. they 
practise a form of pranayama called Recaka 
('emptying out'). [Constantly practising control of 
the vital, forces, they perform Kumbhaka after 
Recaka and Puraka.] 
4.30 Others, having their food regulated, offer the 
vital forces in the vital forces. All of them are 
knowers of the sacrifice and have their sins 
destroyed by sacrifice. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.30 Besides, apare, others; niyata-aharah, having 
their food regulated; juhvati, offer; pranan, the 
vital forces, the different kinds of vital forces; 
pranesu, in the vital forces themselves. Whichever 
function of the vital forces is brought under 
control, in it they offer the other functions. These 
latter become, as it were, merged in the former. 
Sarve api, all; of ete, them; yajna-vidah, are 
knowers of the sacrifice; and yajna-ksapita kamasah, have their sins destroyed by the 
sacrifices as mentioned above. After accomplishing 
the above-mentioned sacrifices, 
4.31 Those who partake of the nectar left over after 
a sacrifice, reach the eternal Brahman. This world 
ceases to exist for one who does not perform 
sacrifices. What to speak of the other (world), O 
best among the Kurus (Arjuna)! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.31 Yajna-sista-amrta-bhujah, those who partake 
of the nectar left over after a sacrifice, i.e. those 
who, after performing the sacrifices described 
above, eat, during the leisure after the sacrifice, the 
food called nectar, as prescribed by the injunctions; 
yanti, reach; sanatanam brahma, the eternal 
Brahman. For the sake of consistency (with the 
Upanisads) it is understood that if they (the 
sacrificers) are seekers of liberation, (then they 
reach Brahman) in due course of time. [The 
Upanisads describe the different stages through 
which those who do good deeds and practise 
meditation have to pass before reaching the 
qualified Brahman after death. For liberation there 
is need also of purification of the heart, Thus, they 
reach Brahman by stages, and not immediately 
after death. (See Ch. 8.5 and subsequent portion; 
also, Br. 4.3.35 to 4.4.25, etc.)] Even ayam lokah, 
this world, common to all beings; na asti, ceases to 
exist; ayajnasya, for one who does not perform 
sacrifices, for him who does not have to his credit 
even a single one of the above sacrifices. Kutah 
anyah, what to speak of the other world which can 
be achieved through special disciplines; 
kurusattama, O best among the Kurus! 
4.32 Thus, various kinds of sacrifices lie spread at 
the mouth of the Vedas. Know them all to be born 
of action. Knowing thus, you will become 
liberated. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.32 Evam, thus; bahu-vidha yajnah, various kinds 
of sacrifices as described; vitatah, lie spread; 
mukhe, at the mouth, at the door; brahmanah, of 
the Vedas. Those which are known through the 
Vedas- as for instance, 'We offer the vital force into 
speech', etc.-are said to be vitatah, spread, 
elaborated; mukhe, at the mouth; brahmanah, of 
the Vedas. Viddhi, know; tan, them; sarvan, all; to 
be karmajan, born of action, accoplished through 
the activities of body, speech and mind, but not 
born of the Self. For the Self is actionless. Hence, 
jnatva, knowing; evam, thus; vimoksyase, you will 
become liberated from evil. By knowing thus-
'These are not my actions; I am actionless and 
detached'-You will be freed from worldly bondage 
as a result of this full enlightenment. This is the 
purport. Through the verse beginning with, 'The 
ladle is Brahman' etc., complete Illumination has 
been represented as a sacrifice. And sacrifices of 
various kinds have been taught. With the help of 
[Some translate this as: As compared with...-Tr.] 
those (sacrifices) that are meant for accomplishing 
desireable human ends, Knowledge (considered as 
a sacrifice) is being extolled: How? 
4.33 O destroyer of enemies, Knowledge 
considered as a sacrifice is greater than sacrifices 
requiring materials. O son of Prtha, all actions in 
their totality culminate in Knowledge. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.33 O destroyer of enemies, jnana-yajnah, 
Knowledge considered as a sacrifice; is sreyan, 
greater; dravyamayat yajnat, than sacrifices 
requiring materials [Including study of the Vedas, 
etc. also.] For, a sacrifice performed with materials 
is an originator of results, [Worldly prosperity, 
attaining heaven, etc.], but Knowledge considered 
as a sacrifice is not productive of results. [It only 
reveals the state of Liberation that is an achieved 
fact. (According to Advaitism, Liberation consists 
in the removal of ignorance by Illumination. 
Nothing new is produced thereby.-Tr.)]. Hence it is 
greater, more praiseworthy. How? Because, 
sarvam, all; karma-akhilam, actions in their 
totality, without exception; O son of Prtha, 
parisamapyate, culminate, get merged (attain their 
consummation); jnane, in Knowledge, which is a 
means to Liberation and is comparable to 'a flood 
all around' (cf.2.46). This is the idea, which accords 
with the Upanisadic text, 'As when the (face of a 
die) bearing the number 4, called Krta, wins, the 
other inferior (numbers on the die-faces) get 
included in it, so whatever good actions are 
performed by beings, all that gets merged in this 
one (Raikva). (So it happens) to anyone who knows 
what he (Raikva) knew' (Ch. 4.1.4). In that case, by 
what means is this highly estimable Knowledge 
acquired? The answer is being given: 
4.34 Know that through prostration, inquiry and 
service. The wise ones who have realized the Truth 
will impart the Knowledge to you. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.34 Viddhi, know; tat, that, the process by which It 
is acquired; by approaching teachers pranipatena, 
through prostration, by lying fully streched on the 
ground with face downward, with prolonged 
salutation; pariprasnena, through inquiry, as to 
how bondage and Liberation come, and what are 
Knowledge and ignorance; and sevaya, through 
the service of the guru. (Know it) through these 
and other (disciplines) [Other disciplines such as 
control of the mind, body, etc. Sankaracarya's own 
words in the Commentary are evamadina, after 
which Ast. puts a full stop, and agreeing with this, 
A.G. says that the word viddhi (know) is to be 
connected with evamadina. Hence this translation. 
Alternatively, those words have to be taken with 
prasrayena. Then the meaning will be, 'Being 
pleased with such and other forms of humility...'-
Tr.]. Being pleased with humility, jnaninah, the 
wise ones, the teachers; tattva-darsinah, who have 
realized the Truth; upadeksyanti, will impart, will 
tell; te, you; jnanam, the Knowledge as described 
above. Although people may be wise, some of 
them are apt to know Truth just as it is, while 
others may not be so. Hence the qualification, 'who 
have realized the Truth'. The considered view of 
the Lord is that Knowledge imparted by those who 
have full enlightenment becomes effective, not any 
other. That being so, the next verse also becomes 
appropriate: 
4.35 Knowing which, O Pandava (Arjuna), you will 
not come under delusion again in this way, and 
through which you will see all beings without 
exception in the Self and also in Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.35 Jnatva, knowing; yat, which-by acquiring 
which Knowledge imparted by them; O Pandava, 
na vasyasi, you will not come under; moham, 
delusion; punah, again; evam, in this way, in the 
way you have come under delusion now. Besides, 
yena, through which Knowledge; draksyasi, you 
will see directly; bhutani, all beings; asesena, 
without exception, counting from Brahma down to 
a clump of grass; atmani, in the Self, in the 
innermost Self, thus-'These beings exist in me' ; and 
atha, also; see that these are mayi. in Me, in 
Vasudeva, the supreme Lord. The purport is, 'You 
will realize the identity of the individual Self and 
God, which is well known in the Upanisads.' 
Moreover, the greatness of this Knowledge is: 
4.36 Even if you be the worst sinner among all 
sinners, still you will cross over all the wickedness 
with the raft of Knowledge alone. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.36 Api cet asi, even if you be; papa-krt-tamah, the 
worst sinner, extremely sinful; sarvebhyah, among 
all; papebhyah, the sinners (papa, lit. sin, means 
here sinner) ; still santarisyasi, you will cross over; 
sarvam, all; the vrjinam, wickedness, the ocean of 
wickedness, sin; [Ast. reads papa-samudram, 
(ocean of sin) in place of papam.-Tr.] jnana-plavena 
eva, with the raft of Knowledge alone, by using 
Knowledge alone as a float. Here [Here, in the 
scriptures imparting spiritual instructions.], 
righteousness (formal religious observance), too, is 
said to be an evil in the case of one aspiring for 
Liberation. How Knowledge destroys sin is being 
told with the help of an illustration: 
4.37 O Arjuna, as a blazing fire reduces pieces of 
wood to ashes, similarly the fire of Knowledge 
reduces all actions to ashes. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.37 O Arjuna, yatha, as; a samiddhah, blazing; 
agnih, fire, a well lighted fire; kurute, reduces; 
edhamsi, pieces of wood; bhasmasat, to ashes; 
tatha, similarly; jnanagnih, the fire of Knowledge Knowledge itself being the fire; kurute, reduces; 
bhasmasat, to ashes; sarva-karmani, all actions, i.e. 
it renders them ineffective, for the fire of 
Knowledge itself cannot directly [Knowledge 
destroys ignorance, and thereby the idea of 
agentship is eradicated. This in turn makes actions 
impossible.] burn actions to ashes, like pieces of 
wood. So, the idea implied is that full 
enlightenment is the cuase of making all actions 
impotent. From the force the context [If the body 
were to die just with the dawn of Knowledge, 
imparting of Knowledge by enlightened persons 
would be impossible, and thus there would be no 
teacher to transmit Knowledge!] it follows that, 
since the result of actions owing to which the 
present body has been born has already become 
effective, therefore it gets eshausted only through 
experiencing it. Hence, Knowledge reduces to 
ashes only all those actions that were done (in this 
life) prior to the rise of Knowledge and that have 
not become effective, as also those performed 
along with (i.e. after the dawn of) Knowledge, and 
those that were done in the many past lives. Since 
this is so, therefore, 
4.38 Indeed, there is nothing purifying here 
comparable to Knowledge. One who has become 
perfected after a (long) time through yoga, realizes 
That by himself in his own heart. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.38 Hi, indeed; na vidyate, there is nothing; 
pavitram, purifying, sanctifying; iha, here; 
sadrsam, comparable; jnanena, to Knowledge. 
Yoga-samsiddhah, one who has become perfected, 
who as attained fitness through yoga-the seeker 
after Liberation who has become samsiddhah, 
purified, qualified; yogena, through the yoga of 
Karma and the yoga of concentration-; kalena, after 
a long time; vindati, realizes, i.e. attains; tat, That, 
Knowledge; verily svayam, by himself; atmani, in 
his own heart. That means by which Knowledge is 
invariably attained is being taught: 
4.39 The man who has faith, is diligent and has 
control over the organs, attains Knowledge. 
Achieving Knowledge, one soon attains supreme 
Peace. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.39 Sraddhavan, the man who has faith; labhate, 
attains; jnanam, Knowledge. Even when one has 
faith, he may be indolent. Therefore the Lord says, 
tatparah, who is diligent, steadfast in the service of 
the teacher, etc., which are the means of attaining 
Knowledge. Even when one has faith and is 
diligent, one may not have control over the organs. 
Hence the Lord says, samyata-indriyah, who has 
control over the organs-he whose organs 
(indriyani) have been withdrawn (samyata) from 
objects. He who is such, who is full of faith, 
diligent, and has control over the organs, does 
surely attain Knowledge. However, prostrations 
etc., which are external, are not invariably fruitful, 
for there is scope for dissimulation faith etc. But 
this is not so in the case of one possessing faith etc. 
Hence they are the unfailing means of acquiring 
Knowledge. What, again, will result from gaining 
Knowledge? This is being answered: Labdhva, 
achieving; jnanam, Knowledge; adhigacchati, one 
attains; acirena, soon indeed; param, supreme; 
santim, Peace, supreme detachment called 
Liberation. That Liberation soon follows from full 
Knowledge is a fact well ascertained from all the 
scriptures and reasoning. One should not entertain 
any doubt in this matter. For doubt is the most 
vicious thing. Why? The answer is being stated: 
4.40 One who is ignorant and faithless, and has a 
doubting mind perishes. Neither this world nor the 
next nor happiness exists for one who has a 
doubting mind. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.40 Ajnah, one who is ignorant, who has not 
known the Self; and asradda-dhanah, who is 
faithless; [Ast. adds here: guruvakya-sastresu 
avisvasavan, who has no faith in the instructions of 
the teacher and the scriptures.-Tr.] and samsaya atma, who has a doubting mind; vinasyati, 
perishes. Although the ignorant and the faithless 
get ruined, yet it is not to the extent that a man 
with a doubting mind does. As for one with a 
doubting mind, he is the most vicious of them all. 
How? Na ayam lokah, neither this world which is 
familiar; na, nor also; parah, the next world; na 
sukham, nor happiness; asti, exist; samsaya atmanah, for one who has a doubting mind. For 
doubt is possible even with regard to them! 
Therefore one should not entertain doubt. Why? 
4.41 O Dhananjaya (Arjuna), actions do not bind 
one who has renounced actions through yoga, 
whose doubt has been fully dispelled by 
Knowledge, and who is not inadvertent. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.41 Yoga-sannyasta-karmanam, one who has 
renounced actions through yoga: that person who 
is a knower of the supreme Goal, by whom actions 
called righteous or unrighteous have been 
renounced through the yoga characterized as the 
Knowledge of the supreme Goal. How does one 
become detached from actions through yoga? The 
Lord says: He is jnana-samchinna-samsayah, one 
whose doubts (samsaya) have been fully dispelled 
(samchinna) by Knowledge (jnana) characterized 
as the realization of the identity of the individual 
Self and God. O Dhananjaya, he who has thus 
renounced actions through yoga, atmavantam, 
who is not inadvertent, not careless; him, karmani, 
actions, seen as the activities of the gunas (see 3.28); 
na nibadhnanti, do not bind, (i.e.) they do not 
produce a result in the form of evil etc. Since one 
whose doubts have been destroyed by Knowledge arising from the destruction of the impurities (of 
body, mind, etc.) as result of the practise of Karma yoga-does not get bound by acitons owing to the 
mere fact of his actions having been burnt away by 
Knowledge; and since one who has doubts with 
regard to the practice of the yogas of Knowledge 
and actions gets ruined 
4.42 Therefore, O scion of the Bharata dyasty, take 
recourse to yoga and rise up, cutting asunder with 
the sword of Knowledge this doubt of your own in 
the heart, arising from ignorance. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
4.42 Tasmat, therefore, O scion of the Bharata 
dynasty; atistha, take recourse to, i.e. undertake; 
yogam, yoga -performance of actions, which is a 
means to full Illumination; and now, uttistha, rise 
up for battle; chittva, cutting asunder; jnanasina, 
with the sword of Knowledge-Knowledge is full 
Illumination, which is a destroyer of such defects 
as sorrows, delusion, etc.; that itself is the sword; 
with that sword of Knowledge-;enam, this; 
samsayam, doubt; atmanah, of your own, which is 
a source of one's own ruin and is most sinful; 
hrtstham, in the heart, residing in the intellect; 
ajnana-sambhutam, arising from ignorance, born of 
non-discrimination. The word atmanah is used 
because doubt concerns oneself. Indeed, another's 
doubt cannot be removed by someone else. Hence 
the word 'own' is used. So, although the doubt is 
with regard to the Self, it is really one's own. 
5.1 Arjuna said -- O Krsna, You praise renunciation 
of actions, and again, (Karma-) yoga. Tell me for 
certain that one which is better between these two. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.1 (O Krsna,) samsasi, You praise, i.e. speak of; 
sannyasam, renunciation; karmanam, of actions, of 
performance of various kinds of rites enjoined by 
the scriptures; punah ca, and again; You praise 
yogam, yoga, the obligatory performance of those 
very rites! Therefore I have a doubt as to which is 
better-Is the performance of actions better, or their 
rejection? And that which is better should be 
undertaken. And hence, bruhi, tell; mam, me; 
suniscitam, for certain, as the one intended by You; 
tat ekam, that one-one of the two, since 
performance of the two together by the same 
person is impossible; yat, which; is sreyah, better, 
more commendable; etayoh, between these two, 
between the renunciation of actions and the 
performance of actions [Ast. reads karma-yoga anusthana (performance of Karma-yoga) in place 
of karma-anusthana (performance of actions).-Tr.], 
by undertaking which you think I shall acquire 
what is beneficial. While stating His own opinion 
in order to arrive at a conclusion.
5.2 The Blessed Lord said -- Both renunciation of 
actions and Karma-yoga lead to Liberation. 
Between the two, Karma-yoga, however, excels 
over renunciation of actions. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.2 Ubhau, both, to be sure; sannyasah, 
renunciation of actions; ca, and; karma-yogah, 
Karma-yoga-their performance-; nihsreyasa-karau, 
lead to Liberation. Though both lead to Liberation 
by virtue of being the cause of the rise of 
Knowledge, even then, tayoh, between the two 
which are the causes of Liberation; Karma-yoga, tu, 
however; visisyate, excels; karma-sannyasat, over 
mere renunciation of actions. Thus He extols 
Karma-yoga. [Karma-yoga is better than 
renunciation of actions that is not based on 
Knowledge.] Why? In answer the Lord says: 
5.3 He who does not hate and does not crave 
should be known as a man of constant 
renunciation. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.3 For, O mighty-armed one, he who is free from 
duality becomes easily freed from bondage. That 
performer of Karma-yoga, yah, who; na dvesti, 
does not hate anything; and na kanksati, does not 
crave; jneyah, should be known; as nitya-sannyasi, 
a man of constant [A man of constant renunciation: 
He is a man of renunciation ever before the 
realization of the actionless Self.] renunciation. The 
meaning is that he who continues to be like this in 
the midst of sorrow, happiness and their sources 
should be known as a man of constant 
renunciation, even though engaged in actions. Hi, 
for; mahabaho, O mighty-armed one; nirdvandvah, 
one who is free from duality; pramucyate, becomes 
freed; sukham, easily, without trouble; bandhat, 
from bondage. It is reasonable that in the case of 
renunciation and Karma-yoga, which are opposed 
to each other and can be undertaken by different 
persons, there should be opposition even between 
their results; but it canot be that both of them 
surely lead to Liberation. When such a question 
arises, this is the answer stated: 
5.4 The fools, not the learned ones, speak of 
Sankhya (the path of Knowledge) and (Karma-) 
yoga as different. Any one who properly resorts to 
even one (of them) gets the result of both. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.4 Balah, the fools; na panditah, not the learned 
ones; pravadanti, speak of; sankhya-yogau, 
Sankhya [Sankhya, i.e. monasticism, is that which 
is suited for sankhya, Self-inquiry.] (the Path of 
Knowledge) and (Karma-)yoga; as prthak, 
different, having opposite and different results. 
The learned ones, the wise, however, admit one, 
unconflicting result. How? Any one who samyak, 
properly; asthitah, resorts to, i.e. follows; ekam api, 
even one, between the Path of Knowledge and 
(Karma-) yoga; vindate, gets; phalam, the result; 
ubhayoh, of both. For, the result of both is that 
Liberation itself. Therefore there is no conflict with 
regard to the result. Objection: After beginning the 
topic with the words, 'renunciation' and '(Karma-) 
yoga', how is it that the Lord speaks of the identity 
of the results of the path of Knowledge and 
(Karma-) yoga, which is beside the point? Reply: 
This defect does not arise. Although the question 
was put by Arjuna merely with regard to 
renunciation and Karma-yoga, yet the Lord,
without actually avoiding them, and by adding 
something special which was intended by Him, 
gave the answer by expressing them through other 
words, 'Sankhya' and '(Karma-) yoga'. Those very 
'renunciation and 'Karma-yoga', when they are 
(respectively) associated with Knowledge and such 
of Its means as equanimity etc., are meant by the 
words 'Sankhya' and 'yoga'. This is the Lord's veiw. 
Therefore there is no discussion out of the context. 
How can the result of both be attained by the 
proper performance of only one? The answer is: 
5.5 The State [Sthana (State) is used in the 
derivative sense of 'the place in which one remains 
established, and from which one does not become 
relegated'.] that is reached by the Sankhyas, that is 
reached by the yogis as well. He sees who sees 
Sankhya and yoga as one. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.5 Sthanam, the State called Liberation; yat 
prapyate, that is reached; sankhyaih, by the 
Sankhyas, by the monks steadfast in Knowledge; 
tat prapyate, that is reached; yogaih, by the yogis; 
api, as well. The yogis are those who, as a means to 
the attainment of Knowledge, undertake actions by 
dedicating them to God without seeking any result 
for themselves. The purport is that, by them also 
that Stated is reached through the process of 
acquiring monasticism which is a result of the 
knowledge of the supreme Reality. Therefore, sah, 
he; pasyati, sees truly; yah, who; pasyati, sees; 
Sankhya and yoga as ekam, one, because of the 
identity of their results. This is the meaning. 
Objection: If this be so, then monasticism itself 
excels yoga! Why, then, is it said, 'Among the two, 
Karma-yoga, however, excels renunciation of 
actions'? Reply: Hear the reason for this: Having is 
veiw the mere giving up of actions and Karma yoga, your question was as to which one was better 
of the two. My answer was accordingly given that 
Karma-yoga excels renunciation of actions 
(resorted to) without Knowledge is Sankhya. This 
is what was meant by me. And that is indeed yoga 
in the highest sense. However, that which is the 
Vedic Karma-yoga is figuratively spoken of as 
yoga and renunciation since it leads to it (supreme 
Knowledge). How does it lead to that? The answer 
is: 
5.6 But, O mighty-armed one, renunciation is hard 
to attain without (Karma-) yoga. The meditative 
man equipped with yoga attains Brahman without 
delay. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.6 Tu, but, O mighty-armed one; sannyasah, 
renunciation, in the real sense; duhkham aptum, is 
hard to attain; ayogatah, without (Karma-) yoga. 
Munih, the meditative man-the word muni being 
derived in the sense of one who meditates on the 
real nature of God; yoga-yuktah, equipped with 
yoga, with Vedic Karma-yoga in the form of 
dedication to God without thought of results (for 
oneself); adhigacchati, attains; brahma, Brahman; 
na cirena, without delay, very quickly. Therefore it 
was said by Me, 'Karma-yoga excels'. [Karma-yoga 
leads to enlightenment through the stages of 
attenuation of attachment, withdrawal of the 
internal and external organs from their objects, and 
their inclination towards the indwelling Self. (Also 
see Commentary on 5.12).] The monasticism under 
discussion is called Brahman because it leads to 
knowledge of the supreme Self, as stated in the 
Upanisad, 'Nyasa (monasticism) is Brahman. 
Brahman is verily the supreme' (Ma. Na. 21.2) 
Brahman means monasticism in the real sense, 
consisting in steadfastness to the knowledge of the 
supreme Self. 
5.7 Endowed with yoga, [i.e. devoted to the 
performance of the nitya and naimittika duties.] 
pure in mind, controlled in body, a conqueror of 
the organs, the Self of the selves of all beings-he 
does not become tainted even while performing 
actions. [The construction of the sentence is this: 
When this person resorts to nitya and naimittika 
rites and duties as a means to the achievement of 
fully Illumination, and thus becomes fully 
enlightened, then, even when he acts through the 
apparent functions of the mind, organs, etc., he 
does not become afflected.] 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.7 When again, as a means to attain full 
enlightenment, this person becomes yoga-yuktah, 
endowed with yoga; visuddhatma, pure in mind; 
vijitatma, controlled in body; jitendriyah, a 
conqueror of the organs; and sarva-bhutatma bhutatma, the Self of the selves of all beings-one 
whose Self (atma), the inmost consciousness, has 
become the selves (atma) of all beings (sarva bhuta) beginning from Brahma to a clump of grass-
, i.e., fully illumined; (then,) thus continuing in that 
state, he na lipyate, does not become tainted; 
kurvan api, even while performing actions for 
preventing mankind from going astray. That is to 
say, he does not become bound by actions. And 
besides, this person does not act in the real sense. 
Hence, 
5.8-5.9 Remaining absorbed in the Self, the knower 
of Reality should think, 'I certainly do not do 
anything', even while seeing, hearing, touching, 
smelling, eating, moving, sleeping, breathing, 
speaking, releasing, holding, opening and closing 
the eyes-remembering that the organs function in 
relation to the objects of the organs. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.8 Yuktah, remaining absorbed in the Self; tattva vit, the knower of Reality-knower of the real nature 
of Truth, of the Self, i.e., the seer of the supreme 
Reality; manyeta, should think; 'na karomi eva, I 
certainly do not do; kincit, anything.' Having 
realized the Truth, when or how should he think? 
This is being answered; Api, even; pasyan, while 
seeing; srnvan, hearing; sprsan, touching; jighran, 
smelling; asnan, eating; gacchan, moving; svapan, 
sleeping; svasan, breathing; pralapan, speaking; 
visrjan, releasing; grhnan, holding; unmisan, 
opening; nimisan, closing the eyes. All these are to 
be connected with the above manyeta (should 
think). For the man who has known the Truth thus, 
who finds nothing but inaction in action-in all the 
movements of the body and organs-, and who has 
full realization, there is competence only for giving 
up all actions because of his realization of the 
nonexistence of actions. Indeed, one who proceeds 
to drink water in a mirage thinking that water is 
there, surely does not go there itself for drinking 
water even after knowing that no water exists 
there! 
5.10 One who acts by dedicating actions to 
Brahman and by renouncing attachment, he does 
not become polluted by sin, just as a lotus leaf is 
not by water. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.10 On the other hand, again, one who is ignorant 
of the Truth and is engaged in Karma-yoga, yah, 
who; karoti, acts; adhaya, by dedicating, by 
surrendering; all karmani, actions; brahmani, to 
Brahman, to God; with the idea, 'I am working for 
Him, as a servant does everything for his master', 
and tyaktva, by renouncing; sangam, attachment, 
even with regard to teh resulting Liberation; sah, 
he; na lipyate, does not get polluted, is not affected; 
papena, by sin; iva, just as; padma-patram, a lotus 
leaf; is not ambhasa, by water. The only result that 
will certainly accrue from such action will be the 
purification of the heart. 
5.11 By giving up attachment, the yogis undertake 
work merely through the body, mind, intellect and 
even the organs, for the purification of themselves. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.11 Since tyaktva, by giving up sangam, 
attachment with regard to results; yoginah, the 
yogis, men of action; kurvanti, undertake; karma, 
work; kevalaih, merely- this word is to be 
construed with each of the words, body etc., so as 
to deny the idea of ownership with regard to all 
actions-; kayena, through the body; manasa, 
through the mind; buddhya, through the intellect; 
and api, even; indriyaih, through the organs, which 
are devoid of the idea of ownership, which are 
unassociated with ownership thus: 'I act only for 
God, and not for my gain'; atmasudhaye, for the 
purification of themselves, i.e., for the purification 
of the heart, therefore you have competence only 
for that. So you undertake action alone. And also 
since, 
5.12 Giving up the result of work by becoming 
resolute in faith, one attains Peace arising from 
steadfastness. One who is lacking in resolute faith, 
being attached to the result under the impulsion of 
desire, becomes bound. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.12 Tyaktva, giving up; karma-phalam, the result 
of work; yuktah, by becoming resolute in faith, by 
having this conviction thus-'Actions are for God, 
not for my gain'; apnoti, attains; santim, Peace, 
called Liberation; naisthikim arising from 
steadfastness. It is to be understood that he attains 
this through the stages of purification of the heart, 
acquisition of Knowledge, renunciation of all 
actions, and steadfastness in Knowledge. On the 
other hand, however, he who is ayuktah, lacking in 
resolute faith; he, phale saktah, being attached to 
result; thinking, 'I am doing this work for my gain'; 
kama-karena, under the impulsion of desire-kara is 
the same as karana (action); the action of desire 
kama-kara; under that impulsion of desire, i.e. 
being prompted by desire; nibadhyate, gets bound. 
Therefore you become resolute in faith. This is the 
idea. But one who has experienced the supreme 
Reality.
5.13 The embodied man of self-control, having 
given up all actions mentally, continues happily in 
the town of nine gates, without doing or causing 
(others) to do anything at all. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.13 Aste, he continues; sukham, happily; 
sannyasya, having given up; sarva-karmani, all 
actions-nitya, naimittika, kamya and nisiddha 
(prohibited actions); [See note on p. 128.-Tr.] 
manasa, mentally, through discriminating wisdom i.e. having given up (all actions) by seeing inaction 
in action, etc. Freed from the activities of speech, 
mind and body, effortles, placid in mind, and 
devoid of all external wants which are different 
from the Self, he continues happily. This is what 
has been said. Where and how does the vasi, man 
of self-control, i.e. one who has his organs under 
control, remain? This is being answered: Nava dvare pure, in the town with nine gates, of which 
seven [Two ears, two eyes nostrils, and mouth.] are 
in the head for one's own experiences, and two are 
below for urination and defecation. As possessed 
of those gates, it is called the 'town with nine 
gates'. Being like a town, the body is called a town 
with the Self as its only master. And it is inhabited 
by the organs, mind, intellect and objects, like 
citizens, as it were, which serve its needs and 
which are productive of many results and 
experience. Renouncing all actions, the dehi, 
embodied one, resides in that town with nine 
gates. Objection: What is the need of this 
specification? For all embodied beings, be they 
monks or not, reside in bodies to be sure! That 
being so, the specification is needless. The answer 
is: The embodied one, however, who is 
unenlightened, who perceives merely the 
aggregate of the body and organs as the Self, he, in 
his totality, thinks, 'I am in a house, on the ground, 
or on the seat.' For one who experiences the body 
alone as the Self, there can certainly be no such 
conviction as, 'I am in the body, like one's being in 
a house.' But, for one who realizes the Self as 
distinct from the aggregate of body etc. it becomes 
reasonable to have the conviction, 'I am in the 
bdoy. It is reasonable that as a result of knowledge 
in the form of discriminating wisdom, there can be 
a mental renunciation of the actions of others, 
which have been ignorantly superimposed on the 
supreme Self. Even in the case of one in whom has 
arisen discriminating wisdom and who has 
renounced all actions, there can be, like staying in a 
house, the continuance in the body itself-the town 
with nine gates-as a consequence of the persistence 
of the remnants of the results of past actions which 
have started bearing fruit, because the awareness 
of being distinct (from the body) arises while one is 
in the body itself. Form the point of veiw of the 
difference between the convictions of the 
enlightened and the unenlightened persons, the 
qualifying words, 'He continues in the body itself', 
do have a purpose to serve. Although it has been 
stated that one continues (in the body) by 
relinquishing actions of the body and organs 
ignorantly superimposed on the Self, still there 
may be the apprehesion that direct or indirect 
agentship inheres in the Self. Anticipating this, the 
Lord says: na eva kurvan, without himself doing 
anything at all; and na karayan, not causing 
(others) to do, (not) inducing the body and organs 
to activity. Objection: Is it that the direct or indirect 
agentship of the embodied one inheres in the Self 
and ceases to be after renunciation, as the 
movement of a traveller ceases with the stoppage 
of his movement? Or, is it that they do not exist 
owing to the very nature of the Self? As to this, the 
answer is: The Self by Its nature has neither direct 
nor indirect agentship. For it was stated, 'It is said 
that...This (Self) is unchangeable' (2.25). 'O son of 
Kunti, although existing in the body, It does not 
act, nor is It affected' (13.31). And it is also stated in 
the Upanisad, 'It seems to meditate, as it were; It 
seems to move, as it were' (Br. 4.3.7). 
5.14 The Self does not create agentship or any 
objects (of desire) for anyone; nor association with 
the results of actions. But it is Nature that acts. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.14 Prabhuh, the Self; na srjati, does not create; 
lokasya, for anyone; kartrtvam, agentship, by 
saying 'Do this'; or even karmani, any objects-such 
objects as chariot, pot, palace, etc. which are 
intensely longed for; nor even karma-phala samyogam, association with the results of actions association of the creator of a chariot etc. with the 
result of his work. Objection: If the embodied one 
does not do anything himself, and does not make 
others do, then who is it that engages in work by 
doing and making others do? The answer is: Tu, 
but; it is svabhavah, Nature- one's own (sva) 
nature (bhava)-characterized as ignorance, Maya, 
which will be spoken of in, 'Since this divine Maya' 
(7.14); pravartate, that acts. But from the highest 
standpoint 
5.15 The Omnipresent neither accepts anybody's 
sin nor even virtue. Knowledge remains covered 
by ignorance. Thereby the creatures become 
deluded. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.15 Vibhuh, the Omnipresent; na adatte, neither 
accetps; kasyacit, anybody's-even a adevotee's; 
papam, sin; na ca eva, nor even; does He accept 
sukrtam, virtue offered by devotees. Why then are 
such virtuous acts as worship etc. as also sacrifices, 
charity, oblation, etc. worship etc. as also sacrifices, 
charity, oblation, etc. offered by devotees? To this 
the Lord says: Jnanam, knowledge, discriminating 
wisdom; remains avrtam, covered; ajnanena, by 
ignorance. Tena, thereby; jantavah, the creatures, 
the non-discriminating people in the world; 
muhyanti, become deluded thus-'I do; I make 
others do; I eat; I make others eat.' 
5.16 But in the case of those of whom that 
ignorance of theirs becomes destroyed by the 
knowledge (of the Self), their Knowledge, like the 
sun, reveals that supreme Reality. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.16 Tu, but; yesam, in the case of those creatures; 
of whom tat ajnanam, that ignorance; atmanah, of 
theirs-being covered by which ignorance creatures 
get deluded-; nasitam, becomes destroyed; 
jnanena, by knowledge, by discriminating 
knowledge concerning the Self; tesam, their; 
jnanam, knowledge; adityavat, like the sun; 
prakasayati, reveals, in the same way as the sun 
reveals all forms whatever; tat-param, that 
supreme Reality, the Reality which is the highest 
Goal, the totality of whatever is to be known. 
5.17 Those who have their intellect absorbed in 
That, whose Self is That, who are steadfast in That, 
who have That as their supreme Goal-they attain 
the state of non-returning, their dirt having been 
removed by Knowledge. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.17 Tat-buddhayah, those who have their intellect 
absorbed in That, [Here Ast. reads 'tasmin 
brahmani, in that Brahman'.-Tr.] in the supreme 
Knowledge which has been revealed; tat-atmanah, 
whose Self is That, who have That (tat) supreme 
Brahman Itself as their Self (atma); tat-nisthah, who 
are steadfast in That-nistha is intentness, exclusive 
devotion; they are called tat-nisthah who become 
steadfast only in Brahman by renouncing all 
actions; and tat-parayanah, who have That as their 
supreme (para) Goal (ayana), who have That alone 
as their supreme Resort, i.e. who are devoted only 
to the Self; those who have got their ignorance 
destroyed by Knowledge-those who are of this 
kind-, they gacchanti, attain; apunaravrttim, the 
state of non-returning, non-association again with 
a body; jnana-nirdhuta-kalmasah, their dirt having 
been removed, destroyed, by Knowledge. Those 
whose dirt (kalmasa), the defect in the form of sin 
etc., which are the cause of transmigration, have 
been removed, destryed (nirdhuta), by the 
aforesaid Knowledge (jnana) are jnana-nirdhuta kalmasah, i.e. the monks. How do those learned 
ones, whose ignorance regarding the Self has been 
destroyed by Knowledge, look upon Reality? That 
is being stated: 
5.18 The learned ones look with equanimity on a 
Brahmana endowed with learning and humality, a 
cow, an elephant and even a dog as well as an eater 
of dog's meat. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.18 Panditah, the learned ones; sama-darsinah, 
look with equanimity; brahmane, on a Brahmana; 
vidya-vinayasampanne, endowed with learning 
and humility-vidya means knowledge of the Self, 
and vinaya means pridelessness-, on a Brahmana 
who has Self-knowledge and modesty; gavi, on a 
cow; hastini, on an elephant; ca eva, and even; 
suni, on a dog; ca, as well as; svapake, on an eater 
of dog's meat. Those learned ones who are 
habituated to see (equally) the unchanging, same 
and one Brahman, absolutely untouched by the 
qualities of sattva etc. and the tendencies created 
by it, as also by the tendencies born of rajas and 
tamas, in a Brahmana, who is endowed with 
Knowledge and tranquillity, who is possessed of 
good tendencies and the quality of sattva; in a cow, 
which is possessed of the middling quality of rajas 
and is not spiritually refined; and in an elephant 
etc., which are wholly and absolutely imbued with 
the quality of tamas-they are seers of equality. 
Objection: On the strength of the text, 'A sacrificer 
incurs sin by not adoring equally one who is an 
equal, and by adoring equally one who is an equal, 
to himself' (Gau. Sm. 17.20), are not they sinful, 
whose food should not be eaten? Reply: They are 
not open to the charge. Objection: How? 
5.19 Here [i.e. even while living in the body.] itself 
is rebirth conquered by them whose minds are 
established on sameness. Since Brahman is the 
same (in all) and free from defects, therefore they 
are established in Brahman. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.19 Iha eva, here itself, even while they are living; 
is sargah, rebirth; jitah, conquered, overcome; taih, 
by them, by the learned ones who see with 
equanimity; yesam, whose; manah, minds, the 
internal organs; are sthitam, established, made 
steadfast; samye, on sameness, in Brahman that 
exists as the same in all beings. It is nirdosam, free 
from defects. Because of Its existence in such mean 
objects as an eater of dog's meat, etc., though It is 
supposed by fools to be affected by the defects of 
those (objects), still It remains untouched by those 
blemishes, hi, because It is free from defects. Nor 
even is It differentiated by Its qualities, since 
Consciousness is free from qualifications. And the 
Lord will speak of desires etc. (cf. 13.6 etc.) as the 
attributes of the aggregate of body and organs, and 
will also say, 'Being without beginning and 
without qualities' (13.31). Nor even are there the 
ultimate distinctions which can create 
differentiation in the Self, [According to the 
Vaisesikas, everything is possessed of not only 
qualities but also of antya-visesa (ultimate 
distinction), which is a category like substance, 
quality, action, etc. This distinction makes every 
entity different from other entities. Thus, 
individual souls have their own ultimate 
distinctions by the very fact that they are 
individuals. Vedanta denies such a category. 
Besides, the Self is one and omnipresent. Therefore 
there is nothing else from which It can be 
distinguished.-Tr.] because there is nothing to 
prove that these ultimate distinctions exist in every 
body. Hence, samam brahma, Brahman is the same 
and one. Tasmat, therefore; te, they; sthitah, are 
established; brahmani, in Brahman Itself. As a 
result, not even a shade of defect touches them. For 
they have no self-identification in the form of 
perceiving the aggregate of body etc. as the Self. 
On the other hand, that statement (Gau. Sm. 17.20) 
refers to the man who has self-identification in the 
form of perceiving the aggregate of body, (organs) 
etc. as the Self, for that statement-'A sacrificer 
incurs sin by not adoring equally one who is an 
equal, and by adoring equally one who is not equal 
to himself, pointedly refers to persons who are the 
objects of adoration. It is indeed seen that in 
worship, charity, etc. the determining factors are 
the possession of such special qualities as being 'a 
knower of Brahman', 'versed in the six auxiliary 
branches of Vedic learning', and 'versed in the four 
Vedas'. But Brahman is bereft of association with 
all qualities and defects. This being so, it is logical 
that they are established in Brahman. And 'adoring 
an equal, ...an unequal,' etc. has reference to men of 
action. [Those engaged in actions with a sense of 
agentship, etc.-Tr.] But this subject under 
consideration, beginning from 'The embodied 
man...having given up all actions mentally' (13) to 
the end of the chapter, is concerning one who has 
given up all actions. Since the Self is Brahman 
which is without blemish and is the same (in all), 
therefore 
5.20 A knower of Brahman, who is established in 
Brahman, should have his intellect steady and 
should not be deluded. He should not get 
delighted by getting what is desirable, nor become 
dejected by getting what is undesirable. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.20 Brahmavit, a knower of Brahman, as 
described; sthitah, who is established; brahmani in 
Brahman- who is not a performer of actions, i.e. 
one who has renounced all actions; sthira-buddhih, 
should have his intellect steady-the man of steady 
intellect is one who has the unwavering, firm 
conviction of the existence of the one and the same 
taintless Self in all beings; and further, 
asammudhah, he should not be deluded, he should 
be free from delusion. Na prahrsyet, he should not 
get delighted; prapya, by getting; priyam, what is 
desirable; na ca udvijet, and surely, neither should 
he become dejected; prapya, by getting; apriyam, 
what is undesirable-because the acquisition of the 
desirable and the undesirable are causes of [Ast.'s 
reading is 'horsa-visadau kurvate, cause happiness 
and sorrow' in place of 'harsa-visada-sthane, 
sources of happiness and sorrow', which (latter) 
reading occurs in G1. Pr. and A.A.-Tr.] happiness 
and sorrow for one who considers the body as the 
Self; not for the one who has realized the absolute 
Self, since in his case there can be no acquisition of 
desirable and undesirable objects. Further, the one 
who is established in Brahman (continue reading)... 
5.21 With his heart unattached to external objects, 
he gets the bliss that is in the Self. With his heart 
absorbed in meditation on Brahman, he acquires 
undecaying Bliss. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.21 Asakta-atma, with his heart, internal organ, 
unattached, bahya-sparsesu, to external objects sparsah means objects that are contacted, viz 
sound etc.; bahya-sparsah means those things 
which are external (bahya) and are objects of 
contact; that person who thus has his heart 
unattached, who derives no happiness from 
objects; he vindati, gets that sukham, bliss; yat, 
which is; atmani, in the Self. Brahma-yoga-yukta atma, with his heart absorbed in meditation on 
Brahman-meditation (yoga) on Brahman is 
brahma-yoga; one whose internal organ (atma) is 
absorbed in (yukta), engaged in, that meditation on 
Brahman is brahma-yoga-yukta-atma; he asnute, 
acquires; aksayam, undecaying; sukham, Bliss. So, 
he who cherishes undecaying happiness in the Self 
should withdraw the organs from the momentary 
happiness in external objects. This is the meaning. 
For this reason also one should withdraw: 
5.22 Since enjoyments that result from contact 
(with objects) are verily the sources of sorrow and 
have a beginning and an end, (therefore) O son of 
Kunti, the wise one does not delight in them. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.22 Hi, since; bhogah, enjoyments; ye 
samsparsajah, that result from contact with objects, 
that arise from contact between the objects and the 
organs; are eva, verily; duhkha-yonayah, sources of 
sorrow, because they are creations of ignorance. It 
is certainly a matter of experience that physical and 
other sorrows are created by that itself. By the use 
of the word eva (verily), it is understood that, as it 
happens here in this world, so does it even in the 
other world. Realizing that there is not the least 
trace of happiness in the world, one should 
withdraw the organs from the objects which are 
comparable to a mirage. Not only are they sources 
of sorrow, they also adi-antavantah, have a 
beginning and an end. Adi (beginning) of 
enjoyments consists in the contact between objects 
and senses, and their end (anta), indeed, is the loss 
of that contact. Hence, they have a beginning and 
an end, they are impermanent, being present in the 
intervening moment. This is the meaning. 
(Therefore) O son of Kunti, budhah, the wise one, 
the discriminating person who has realized the 
Reality which is the supreme Goal; na ramate, does 
not delight; tesu, in them, in enjoyments. For 
delight in objects is seen only in very foolish 
beings, as for instance in animals etc. This 
extremely painful evil, which is opposed to the 
path of Bliss and is the source of getting all 
miseries, is difficult to resist. Therefore one must 
make the utmost effort to avoid it. Hence the Lord 
says:; 
5.23 One who can withstand here itself-before 
departing from the body-the impulse arising from 
desire and anger, that man is a yogi; he is happy. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.23 Yah saknoti, one who can, is able to; sodhum, 
withstand; iha eva, here itself, while alive; prak, 
before; sarira-vimoksanat, departing from the 
body, till death-. Death is put as a limit because the 
impulse of desire and anger is certanily inevitable 
for a living person. For this impulse has got infinite 
sources. One should not relax until his death. That 
is the idea. Kama, desire, is the hankering, thirst, 
with regard to a coveted object-of an earlier 
experience, and which is a source of pleasure-when 
it comes within the range of the senses, or is heard 
of or remembered. And krodha, anger, is that 
repulsion one has against what are adverse to 
oneself and are sources of sorrow, when they are 
seen, heard of or remembered. That impulse (veda) 
which has those desire and anger as its source 
(udbhava) is kama-krodha-udbhava-vegah. The 
impulse arising from desire is a kind of mental 
agitation, and has the signs of horripilation, joyful 
eyes, face, etc. The impulse of anger has the signs 
of trembling of body, perspiration, bitting of lips, 
red eyes, etc. He who is able to withstand that 
impulse arising from desire and anger, sah narah, 
that man; is yuktah, a yogi; and sukhi, is happy, in 
this world. What kind of a person, being 
established in Brahman, attains Brahman? The 
Lord says: 
5.24 One who is happy within, whose pleasure is 
within, and who has his light only within, that 
yogi, having become Brahman, attains absorption 
in Brahman. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.24 Yah antah-sukhah, one who is happy within, 
in the indwelling Self; and so also antar-aramah, 
has pleasure within-he disports only in the Self 
within; similarly, antar-jyotih eva, has his light 
only within, has the indwelling Self alone as his 
light; [He has not to depend on the organs like ear 
etc. for acquiring knowledge.] sah yogi, that yogi; 
yah, who is of this kind; brahma-bhutah, having 
become Brahman, even while he is still living; 
adhigacchati, attains; brahma-nirvanam, 
absorption in Brahman-gets Liberation. Besides, 
5.25 The seers whose sins have been attenuated, 
who are freed from doubt, whose organs are under 
control, who are engaged in doing good to all 
beings, attain absorption in Brahman. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.25 Rsayah, the seers, those who have full 
realization, the monks; ksina-kalmasah, whose 
sins, defects like sin etc., have been attenuated; 
chinna-dvaidhah, who are freed from doubt; yata atmanah, whose organs are under control; ratah, 
who are engaged; sarvabhutahite, in doing good to 
all beings-favourably disposed towards all, i.e. 
harmless; labhante, attain; brahma-nirvanam, 
absorption in Brahman, Liberation. Further, 
5.26 To the monks who have control over their 
internal organ, who are free from desire and anger, 
who have known the Self, there is absorption in 
Brahman either way. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.26 Yatinam, to the monks; yata-cetasam, who 
have control over their internal organ; kama krodha-viyuktanam, who are free from desire and 
anger; vidita-atmanam, who have known the Self, 
i.e. who have full realization; vartate, there is; 
brahma-nir-vanam, absorption in Brahman, 
Liberation; abhitah, either way, whether living or 
dead. Immediate Liberation of the monks who are 
steadfast in full realization has been stated. And 
the Lord has said, and will say, at every stage that 
Karma-yoga, undertaken as a dedication to 
Brahman, to God, by surrendering all activities 
[The activities of body, mind and organs] to God, 
leads to Liberation through the stages of 
purification of the heart, attainment of Knowledge, 
and renunciation of all actions. Thereafter, now, 
with the idea, 'I shall speak elaborately of the yoga 
of meditation which is the proximate discipline for 
full realization,' the Lord gave instruction through 
some verses in the form of aphorisms: 
5.27-5.28 Keeping the external objects outside, the 
eyes at the juncture of the eye-brows, and making 
equal the outgoing and incoming breaths that 
move through the nostrils, the contemplative who 
has control over his organs, mind and intellect 
should be fully intent on Liberation and free from 
desire, fear and anger. He who is ever is verily free. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.27 Krtva, keeping; bahyan, the external; sparsan, 
objects-sound etc.; bahih, outside: To one who does 
not pay attention to the external objects like sound 
etc., brought to the intellect through the ear etc., 
the objects become verily kept outside. Having 
kept them out in this way, and (keeping) the 
caksuh, eyes; antare, at the juncture; bhruvoh, of 
the eye-brows (-the word 'keeping' has to be 
supplied-); and similarly, samau krtva, making 
equal; prana-apanau, the outgoing and the 
incoming breaths; nasa-abhyantara-carinau, that 
move through the nostrils; munih, the 
contemplative-derived (from the root man) in the 
sense of contemplating-, the monk; yata-indriya mano-buddhih, who has control over his organs, 
mind and intellect; should be moksa-para-yanah, 
fully intent on Liberation-keeping his body is such 
a posture, the contemplative should have 
Liberation itself as the supreme Goal. He should be 
vigata-iccha-bhaya-krodhah, free from desire, fear 
and anger. The monk yah, who; sada, ever remains 
thus; sah, he; is muktah yah, who;sada, ever 
remains thus; sah, he; is muktah, ever, verily free. 
He has no other Liberation to seek after. What is 
there to be realized by one who has his mind thus 
concentrated? The answer this is beig stated: 
5.29 One attains Peace by knowing Me who, as the 
great Lord of all the worlds, am the enjoyer of 
sacrifices and austerities, (and) who am the friend 
of all creatures. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
5.29 Rcchati, one attains; santim, Peace, complete 
cessation of transmigration; jnatva, by knowing; 
mam, Me who am Narayana; who, as the sarva loka-mahesvaram, great Lord of all the worlds; am 
the bhoktaram, enjoyer (of the fruits); yajna tapasam, of sacrifices and austerities, as the 
performer and the Deity of the sacrifices and 
austerities (respectively); (and) who am the 
suhrdam, friend; sarva-bhutanam, of all creatures who am the Benefactor of all without consideration 
of return, who exist in the heart of all beings, who 
am the dispenser of the results of all works, who 
am the Witness of all perceptions. 
6.1 The Blessed Lord said -- He who performs an 
action which is his duty, without depending on the 
result of action, he is a monk and a yogi; (but) not 
(so in) he who does not keep a fire and is 
actionless. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.1 Anasritah, without depending on;-on what?-on 
that which is karma-phalam, the result of action i.e. without craving for the result of action-. He 
who craves for the results of actions becomes 
dependent on the results of actions. But this person 
is the opposite of such a one. Hence (it is said), 
'wihtout depending on the result of action. Having 
become so, yah he who; karoti, performs 
accomplishes; (karma, an action;) which is his 
karyam, duty, the nityakarmas such as Agnihotra 
etc. which are opposed to the kamya-karmas-. 
Whoever is a man of action of this kind is 
distinguished from the other men of action. In 
order to express this idea the Lord says, sah, he ; is 
a sannyasi, monk, and a yogi. Sanyyasa, means 
renunciation. he who is possessed of this is a 
sannyasi, a monk. And he is also a yogi. Yoga 
means concentration of mind. He who has that is a 
yogi. It is to be understood that this man is 
possessed of these qualities. It is not to be 
understood that, only that person who does not 
keep a fire (niragnih) and who is actionless 
(akriyah) is a monk and a yogi. Niragnih is one 
from whom the fires [viz Garhapatya, Ahavaniya, 
Anvaharya-pacana, etc.], which are the accessories 
of rites, have bocome dissociated. By kriya are 
mean austerity, charity, etc. which are performed 
wityout fire. Akriyah, actionless, is he who does 
not have even such kriyas. Objection: Is it not only 
with regard to one who does not keep a fire and is 
acitonless that monasticsm and meditativeness are 
well known in the Vedas, Smrtis and scriptures 
dealing with meditation? Why are monasticism 
and meditativeness spoken of here with regard to 
one who keeps a fire and is a man of action-which 
is not accepted as a fact? Reply: This defect does 
not arise, because both are sought to be asserted in 
some secondary sense. Objection: How is that? 
Reply: His being monk is by virtue of his having 
given up hankering for the results of actions; and 
his being a man of meditation is from the fact of his 
doing actions as accesories to meditation or from 
his rejection of thoughts for the results of actions 
which cause disturbances in the mind. Thus both 
are used in a figurative sense. On the contrary, it is 
not that monasticism and meditativeness are meant 
in the primary sense. With a veiw to pointing out 
this idea, the Lord says: 
6.2 That which they call monasticism, know that to 
be Yoa, O Pandava, For, nobody who has not given 
up expectations can be a yogi. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.2 Yam, that which is characterized by the giving 
up of all actions and their results; which prahuh, 
they, the knowers of the Vedas and the Smrtis, call; 
sannyasam iti, monasticism, in the real sense; 
viddhi, known; tam, that monasticism in the real 
sense; to be yogam, Yoga, consisting in the 
performance of actions, O Pandava. Accepting 
what kind of similarity between Karma-yoga, 
which is characterized by engagement (in actions), 
and its opposite, renunciation in the real sense, 
which is characterized by cessation from work, has 
their equation been stated? When such an 
apprehension arises, the answer is this; From the 
point of view of the agent, there does exist a 
simialrity of Karma-yoga with real renunciation. 
For he who is a monk in the real sense, from the 
very fact of his having given up all the means 
needed for accomplishing actions, gives up the 
thought of all actions and their results-the source 
of desire that leads to engagement in work. 
[Thoughts about an object lead to the desire for it, 
which in turn leads to actions for getting it. (Also 
see note under 4.19)] also, even while performing 
actions, gives up the thought for results. Pointing 
out this idea, the Lord says: Hi, for; kascit, nobody, 
no man of action whosoever; asannyasta sankalpah, who has not given up expactaions-one 
by whom has not been renounced expectation, 
anticipation, of results;bhavati, becomes, i.e. can 
become; yogi, a yogi, a man of concentration, 
because thought of results is the cause of the 
disturbance of mind. Therefore, any man of action 
who gives up the thought of results would become 
a yogi, a man of concentration with an 
unperturbed mind, because of his having given up 
thought of results which is the cause of mental 
distractions. This is the purport. Thus, because of 
the similarity of real monasticism with Karma yoga from the point of veiw of giving up by the 
agent, Karma-yoga is extolled as monasticism in, 
'That which they call monasticism, know that to be 
Yoga, O Pandava.' Since Karma-yoga, which is 
independent of results, is the remote help to 
Dhyana-yoga, therefore it has been praised as 
monasticism. Thereafter, now the Lord shows how 
Karma-yoga is helpful to Dhyana-yoga: 
6.3 For the sage who wishes to ascend to (Dhyana-) 
yoga, action is said to be the means. For that 
person, when he has ascended to (Dhyana-)yoga, 
inaction alone is said to be the means. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.3 Aruruksoh, for one who wishes to ascend, who 
has not ascended, i.e. for that very person who is 
unable to remain established in Dhyana-yoga;-for 
which person who is desirous to ascend?-munch, 
for the sage, i.e. for one who has renounced the 
results of actions;-trying to ascend to what?-
yogam, to (Dhyana-) yoga; karma, action; ucyate, is 
said to be; the karanam, means. Tasya, for that 
person, again; yoga-arudhasya, when he has 
ascended to (Dhyana-) yoga; samah, inaction, 
withdrawl from all actions; eva, alone; ucyate, is 
said to be; karanam, the means for remaining 
poised in the state of meditation. This is the 
meaning. To the extent that one withdraws from 
actions, the mind of that man who is at cease and 
self-controlled becomes concentrated. When this 
occurs, he at once becomes established in Yoga. 
And accordingly has it been said by Vyasa: 'For a 
Brahmana there is no wealth conparable to (the 
knowledge of) oneness, sameness, truthfulness, 
character, equipoise, harmlessness, 
straightforwardness and withdrawal from various 
actions' (Mbh. Sa. 175.37). After that, now is being 
stated when one becomes established in Yoga: 
6.4 Verily, [Verily: This word emphasizes the fact 
that, since attachment to sense objects like sound 
etc. and to actions is an obstacle in the path of 
Yoga, therefore the removal of that obstruction is 
the means to its attainment.] when a man who has 
given up thought about everything does not get 
attached to sense-objects or acitons, he is then said 
to be established in Yoga. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.4 Hi, verily; yada, when; a yogi who is 
concentrating his mind, sarva-sankalpa-sannyasi, 
who has given up thought about everything-who is 
apt to give up (sannyasa) all (sarva) thoughts 
(sankalpa) which are the causes of desire, for 
things here and hereafter; na anusajjate, does not 
become attached, i.e. does not hold the idea that 
they have to be done by him; indriya-arthesu, with 
regard to sense-objects like sound etc.; and 
karmasu, with regard to actions-nitya, naimittika, 
kamya and nisiddha (prohibited) because of the 
absence of the idea of their utility; tada, then, at 
that time; ucyate, he is said to be; yoga-arudhah, 
established in Yoga, i.e. he is said to have attained 
to Yoga. From the expression, 'one who has given 
up thought about eveything', it follows that one 
has to renounce all desires and all actions, for all 
desires have thoughts as their source. This accords 
with such Smrti texts as: 'Verily, desire has thought 
as its source. Sacrifices arise from thoughts' (Ma. 
Sm. 2.3); 'O Desire, I know your source. You surely 
spring from thought. I shall not think of you. So 
you will not arise in me' (Mbh. Sa. 177.25). And 
when one gives up all desires, renunciation of all 
actions becomes accomplished. This agrees with 
such Upanisadic texts as, '(This self is identified 
with desire alone.) What it desires, it resolves; 
what it resolves, it works out' (Br. 4.4.5); and also 
such Smrti texts as, 'Whatever actions a man does, 
all that is the effect of desire itself' (Ma. Sm. 2.4). It 
accords with reason also. For, when all thoughts 
are renounced, no one can even move a little. So, 
by the expression, 'one who has given up thought 
about everything', the Lord makes one renounced 
all desires and all actions. When one is thus 
established in Yoga, then by that very fact one's self 
becomes uplifted by oneself from the worldly state 
which is replete with evils. Hence, 
6.5 One should save oneself by oneself; one should 
not lower oneself. For oneself is verily one's onw 
friend; oneself is verily one's own enemy. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.5 Uddharet, one should save; atmanam, oneself 
sunk in the sea of the world; atmana, by oneself; 
one should save, ut-haret, should uplift (oneself) 
from that, i.e. make it attain the state of being 
established in Yoga. Na avasadayet, one should not 
lower, debase; atmanam, oneself. Hi, for; atma eva, 
oneself is verily; atmanah one's own; bandhuh, 
friend. Centainly there is no other friend who can 
bring about liberation from this world. In fact, even 
a friend is an obstacle to Liberation, he being the 
source of such bondages as love etc. Therefore the 
emphatic statement, 'For one is one's own friend, is 
justifiable. Atma eva, oneself verily; is atmanah, 
one's own: ripuh, enemy. Anyone else who is an 
external harmful enemy, even he is of one's own 
making! Therefore the firm conclusion, 'oneself 
verily is one's own enemy's is reasonable. It has 
been said that 'oneself is verily one's own friend, 
oneself verily is one's own enemy.' As to that, (the 
self) [Ast. has this additional word, atma, self.-Tr.] 
of what kind is one's own friend, or (the self) of 
what kind is one's own enemy? This is being
answered: 
6.6 Of him, by whom has been conquered his very 
self by the self, his self is the friend of his self. But, 
for one who has not conquered his self, his self 
itself acts inimically like an enemy. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.6 Tasya, of him; yena, by whom; jitah, has been 
conquered, subdued; his eva atma, very self, the 
aggregate of body and organs; that atma, self; is 
bandhuh, the friend; atmanah, of his self. The idea 
is that he is a conqueror of his senses. Tu, but; 
anatmanah, for one who has not conquered his self, 
who has no self-control; atma eva, his self itself; 
varteta, acts; satruvat, like an enemy; satrutve, 
inimically, with the attitude of an enemy. As an 
enemy, who is different from oneself, does harm to 
oneself, similarly one's self behaves like an enemy 
to oneself. This is the meaning. [If the body and 
organs are under control, they are helpful in 
concentrating one's mind on the Self; but, if they 
are not under control, they oppose this 
concentration.] 
6.7 The supreme Self of one who has control over 
the aggregate of his body and organs, and who is 
tranquil, becomes manifest. (He should be 
equipoised) [These words are supplied to complete 
the sentence.] in the midst of cold and heat, 
happiness and sorrow, as also honour and 
dishonour. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.7 Parama-atma, the supreme Self; jita-atmanah, of 
one who has control over the aggregate of his body 
and organs; prasantasya, who is tranquil, who is a 
monk with his internal organ placid; samahitah, 
becomes manifest, i.e. becomes directly manifest as 
his own Self. Moreover, (he should be equipoised) 
sita-usna-sukha-duhkhesu, in the midst of cold and 
heat, happiness and sorrow; tatha, as also; mana apamanayoh in honour and dishonour, adoration 
and despise. 
6.8 One whose mind is satisfied with knowledge 
and realization, who is unmoved, who has his 
organs under control, is sadi to be Self-absorbed. 
The yogi treats equally a lump of earth, a stone and 
gold. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.8 A yogi, jnana-vijnana-trpta-atma, whose mind 
is satisfied with knowledge and realization-jnana is 
thorough knowledge of things presented by the 
scriptures, but vijnana is making those things 
known from the scriptures a subject of one's own 
realization just as they have been presented; he 
whose mind (atma) has become contented (trpta) 
with those jnana and vijnana is jnana-vijnana-trpta atma-; kutasthah, who is unmoved, i.e. who 
becomes unshakable; and vijita-indriyah, who has 
his organs under control;- he who is of this kind, 
ucyate, is said to be; yuktah, Self-absorbed. That 
yogi sama-losta-asma-kancanah, treats equally a 
lump of earth, a stone and gold. Further, 
6.9 He excels who has sameness of view with 
regard to a benefactor, a friend, a foe [Ari (foe) is 
one who does harm behind one's back.], a neutral, 
an arbiter, the hateful, [Dvesyah is one who openly 
hateful.] a relative, good people and even sinners. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.9 The first line of the verse beginning with 
'benefactor,' etc. is a single compound word. 
Visisyate, he excels, i.e. he is the best among all 
those who are established in Yoga-(a different 
reading is vimucyate, he becomes free); sama buddhih, who has sameness of view, i.e. whose 
mind is not engaged with the question of who one 
is and what he does; with regard to a suhrd, 
benefactor-one who does some good without 
consideration of return; mitram, a friend, one who 
is affectionate; arih, a foe; udasinah, a neutral, who 
sides with nobody; madhyasthah, an arbiter, who 
is a well-wisher of two conflicting parties; dvesyah, 
the hateful, who is repulsive to oneself; bandhuh, a 
relative;- to all these as also sadhusu, with regard 
to good people, who follow the scriptures; api ca, 
and even; papesu, sinners, who perform prohibited 
actions-with regard to all of them. Therefore, to 
acquire this excellent result 6.10 A yogi should constantly concentrate his mind 
by staying in a solitary place, alone, with mind and 
body controlled, free from expectations, (and) free 
from acquisition. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.10 A yogi, a man of meditation; satatam yunjita, 
should constantly concentrate; atmanam, his mind; 
sthitah, by staying; rahasi, in a solitary place, in 
mountain caves etc.; ekaki, alone, without any 
companion; yata-citta-atma, with mind and body 
controlled; nirasih, without expectations, free from 
hankering; and aparigrahah, free from acquisition. 
From the uise of the qualifying words, 'in a solitary 
place' and 'alone', it follows that (he has to 
undertake all these) after espousing monasticism. 
And even after renunciation, he should concentrate 
his mind by desisting from all acquisition. This is 
the meaning. Now then have to be stated the rules 
regarding seat, food, movements, etc. as disciplines 
for yoga in the case of one practising concentration; 
as also the signs of one who has succeeded in Yoga, 
and the consequent result etc. Hence this is begun. 
Among these, the seat is being first spoken of: 
6.11 Having firmly established in a clean place his 
seat, neither too high nor too low, and made of 
cloth, skin and kusa-grass, placed successively one 
below the other; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.11 See Commentary under 6.12 
6.12 (and) sitting on that seat, he should 
concentrate his mind for the purification of the 
internal organ, making the mind one-pointed and 
keeping the actions of the mind and senses under 
control. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.12 Pratisthapya, having established; sthiram, 
firmly; sucau, in a clean; dese, place, which is 
solitary, either naturally or through improvement; 
atmanah, his own; asanam, seat; na ati ucchritam, 
neither too high; na ati nicam, nor even too low; 
and that made of caila-ajina-kusa-uttram, cloth, 
skin, and kusa-grass, placed successively one 
below the other-the successive arrangement of 
cloth etc. here is in a reverse order to that of the 
textual reading-. What follows after thus 
establishing the seat? Upavisya, sitting; tatra, on 
that; asane, seat; yogam yunjyat, he should 
concentrate his mind. To what purpose should he 
concentrate his mind? In answer the Lord says: 
atma-visuddhaye, for the purification of the 
internal organ. How? Krtva, making; manah, the 
mind; ekagram, one-pointed,by withdrawing it 
from all objects; and yata-citta-indriya-kriyah, 
keeping the actions (kriyah) of the mind (citta) and 
senses (indriya) under control (yata). The external 
seat has been spoken of. Now is being stated how 
the posture of the body should be: 
6.13 Holding the body, head and neck erect and 
still, being steady, looking at the tip of his own 
nose-and not looking around; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.13 See Commentary under 6.14 
6.14 He should remain seated with a placid mind, 
free from fear, firm in the vow of a celibate, and 
with the mind fixed on Me by controlling it 
through concentration, having Me as the supreme 
Goal. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.14 Dharayan, holding; kaya-siro-girvam, the 
body (torso), head and neck; samam, erect; and 
acalam, still-movement is possible for one (even 
while) holding these erect; therefore it is specified, 
'still'-; sthirah, being steady, i.e. remaining steady; 
sampreksya, looking svam nasikagram, at tip of his 
own nose -looking at it intently, as it were; ca, and; 
anavalokayan, not looking; disah, around, i.e. not 
glancing now and then in various directions-. The 
words 'as it were' are to be understood because 
what is intended here is not an injunction for 
looking at the tip of one's own nose! What then? It 
is the fixing the gaze of the eyes by withdrawing it 
from external objects; and that is enjoined with a 
veiw to concentrating the mind. [What is sought to 
be presented here as the primary objective is the 
concentration of mind. If the gaze be directed 
outward, then it will result in interrupting that 
concentration. Therefore the purpose is to first fix 
the gaze of the eyes within.] If the intention were 
merely the looking at the tip of the nose, then the 
mind would remain fixed there itself, not on the 
Self! In, 'Making the mind fixed in the Self' (25), the 
Lord will speak of concentrating the mind verily 
on the Self. Therefore, owing to the missing word 
iva (as it were), it is merely the withdrawl of the 
gaze that is implied by sampreksya (looking). 
Further, prasantatma, with a placid mind, with a 
mind completely at peace; vigata-bhih, free from 
fear sthitah, firm; brahmacari-vrate, in the vow of a 
celibate, the vow cosisting in serivce of the teacher, 
eating food got by beggin, etc.-firm in that, i.e. he 
should follow these; besides, mat-cittah, with the 
mind fixed on Me who am the supreme God; 
samyamya, by controlling; manah, the mind, i.e. by 
stopping the modifications of the mind; yuktah, 
through concentration, i.e. by becoming 
concentrated; asita, he should remain seated; 
matparah, with Me as the supreme Goal. Some 
passionate person may have his mind on a woman, 
but he does not accept the woman as his supreme 
Goal. What then? He accepts the king or Sive as his 
goal. But this one (the yogi) not only has his mind 
on Me but has Me as his Goal. After that, now is 
being stated the result of Yoga: 
6.15 Concentrating the mind thus for ever, the yogi 
of controlled mind achieves the Peace which 
culminates in Liberation and which abides in Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.15 Yunjan, concentrating; atmanam, the mind; 
evam, thus, according to the methods shown 
above; sada, for ever; the yogi, niyata-manasah, of 
controlled mind; adhi-gacchati, achieves; santim, 
the Peace, the indifference to worldly attachments 
and possessions; nirvana-paramam, which 
culminates in Liberation; and mat-samstham, 
which abides in Me. Now are bieng mentioned the 
rules about the yogi's food etc.: 
6.16 But, O Arjuna, Yoga is not for one who eats 
too much, nor for one who does not eat at all; 
neither for one who habitually sleeps too long, nor 
surely for one who keeps awake. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.16 (Tu, but) O Arjuna, Yoga na asti, is not; 
atiasnatah, for one who eats too much, for one who 
eats food more than his capacity; na ca, nor is 
Yoga; anasnatah, for one who does not eat; 
ekantam, at all. This accords with the Vedic text, 
'As is well known, if one eats that much food 
which is within one's capacity, then it sustains him, 
it does not hurt him; that which is more, it harms 
him; that which is less, it does not sustain him' (Sa. 
Br.; Bo. Sm. 2.7.22). Therefore, a yogi should not eat 
food more or less than what is suitable for him. Or 
the meaning is that Yoga is not for one who eats 
more food than what is prescribed for a yogi in the 
scriptures on Yoga. Indeed, the quantity has been 
mentioned in, 'One half of the stomach is to be 
filled with food including curries; the third quarter 
is to be filled with water; but the fourth quarter is 
to be left for the movement of air,' etc. Similarly,
Yoga is not for ati svapna-silasya, one who 
habitually sleeps too long; and Yoga is na eva, 
surely not; jagratah, for one who keeps awake too 
long. How, again, does Yoga become possibel? 
This is being stated: 
6.17 Yoga becomes a destroyer of sorrow of one 
whose eating and movements are regulated, whose 
effort in works is moderate, and whose sleep and 
wakefulness are temperate. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.17 Yogah bhavati, Yoga becomes; duhkha-ha, a 
destroyer of sorrow-that which destroys (hanti) all 
sorrows (duhkhani)-, i.e., Yoga destroys all worldly 
sorrows; yukta-ahara-viharasya, of one whose 
eating and movements are regulated- ahara (lit. 
food) means all that is gathered in, [According to 
the Commentator, ahara, which also means food, 
includes mental 'food as well. See Ch. 7.26.2.-Tr.] 
and vihara means moving about, walking; one for 
whom these two are regulated (yukta) is yukta ahara-vihara-; and also yukta-cestasya, of one 
whose effort (cesta) is moderate (yukta); karmasu, 
in works; similarly, yukta-svapna-avabodhasya, of 
one whose sleep (svapna) and wakefulness 
(avabodha) are temperate (yukta), have regulated 
periods. To him whose eating and movements are 
regulated, whose effort in work is moderate, whose 
sleep and wakefulness are temperate, Yoga 
becomes a destroyer of sorrows. When does a man 
become concentrated? That is being presently 
stated: 
6.18 A man who has become free from hankering 
for all desirable objects is then said to be Self absorbed when the controlled mind rests in the Self 
alone. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.18 A yogi, nihsprhah, who has become free from 
hankering, thirst; sarva-kamebhyah, for all 
desirable objects, seen and unseen; is tada, then; 
ucyate, said to be; yuktah, Self-absorbed; yada, 
when; the viniyatam, controlled; cittam, mind, the 
mind that has been made fully one-pointed by 
giving up thought of external objects; avatisthate, 
rests; atmani eva, in the non-dual Self alone, i.e. he 
gets established in his own Self. An illustration in 
being given for the mind of that yogi which has 
become Self-absorbed: 
6.19 As a lamp kept in a windless place does not 
flicker, such is the simile thought of for the yogi 
whose mind is under control, and who is engaged 
in concentration on the Self. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.19 Yatha, as; a dipah, lamp; nivata-sthah, kept in 
a windless place; na ingate, does not flicker; sa 
upama, such is the simile-that with which 
something is compared is an upama (smile)-; 
smrta, thought of, by the knowers of Yoga who 
understand the movements of the mind; yoginah, 
for the yogi; yata-citasya, whose mind is under 
control; and yunjatah, who is engaged in; yogam, 
concentration; atmanah, on the Self, i.e. who is 
practising Self-absorption. By dint of practising 
Yoga thus, when the mind, comparable to a lamp 
in a windless place, becomes concentrated, then 6.20 At the time when the mind restrained through 
the practice of Yoga gets withdrawn, and just when 
by seeing the Self by the self one remains contented 
in the Self alone [A.G. construes the word eva 
(certainly) with tusyati (remains contented).-Tr.]; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.20 Yatra, at the time when; cittam, the mind; 
niruddham, restrained, entirely prevented from 
wandering; uparamate, gets withdrawn; yoga sevaya, through the practice of Yoga; ca, and; yatra 
eva, just when, at the very moment when; pasyan, 
by seeing, by experiencing; atmanam, the Self, 
which by nature is the supreme light of 
Consciousness; atmana, by the self, by the mind 
purified by concentration; tusyati, one remains 
contented, gets delighted; atmani eva, in one's own 
Self alone-. [Samadhi is of two kinds, Samprajnata 
and Asamprajnata. The concentration called right 
knowledge (Samprajnata) is that which is followed 
by reasoning, discrimination, blisss and 
unqualified egoism. Asamprajnata is that which is 
attained by the constant practice of cessation of all 
mental activity, in which the citta retains only the 
unmanifested impressions.-Cf. C. W., Vol. I, 1962, 
pp. 210, 212. According to A.G. the verses upto 6.20 
state in a general way the characteristics of 
samadhi. From the present verse to the 25th, 
Asamprajnata-samadhi is introduced and defined.-
Tr.] Besides, 
6.21 When one experienece that absolute Blisss 
which can be intuited by the intellect and which is 
beyond the senses, and being established (thus) 
this person surely does not swerve from Reality; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.21 Yatra, when, at the time when; vetti, one 
experiences; tat, that; atyantikam, absolute-which 
is verily limitless, i.e. infinite; sukham, Bliss; yat, 
which; buddhi-grahyam, can be intuited by the 
intellect, intuited by the intellect alone, without the 
help of the senses; and which is atindriyam, 
beyond the senses, i.e. not objective; (-when one 
experieneces this kind of Bliss) and sthitah, being 
established in the nature of the Self; ayam, this 
person, the illumined one; eva, surely; na calati, 
does not swerve; tattvatah, from that Reality-i.e. 
does not deviate from the nature of Reality-. 
Further, 
6.22 Obtaining which one does not think of any 
other acquisition to be superior to that, and being 
established in which one is not perturbed even by 
great sorrow; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.22 Labdhva, obtaining; yam, which-by acquiring 
which Self-attainment; na manyate, one does not 
think; that there is aparam, any other; labham, 
acquisition; tatah adhikam, superior to that; and 
also, sthitah,being established; yasmin, in which 
Reality of the Self; na vicalyate, one is not 
perturbed; api, even; guruna, by great; duhkhena, 
sorrow, as may be caused by being struck with 
weapons, etc.-. The yoga that has been spoken of as 
a particular state of the Self, distinguished by its 
characterisics in the verses beginning with 'At the 
time when the mind gets withdrawn,' (20) etc.- 
6.23 One should know that severance of contact 
with sorrow to be what is called Yoga. That Yoga 
has to be practised with perservance and with an 
undepressed heart. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.23 Vidyat, one should know; tat, that; duhkha samyoga-viyogam, severance (viyoga) of contact 
(samyoga) with sorrow (duhkha); to be verily 
yoga-sanjnitam, what is called Yoga-i.e. oen should 
know it through a negative definition. After 
concluding the topic of the result of Yoga, the need 
for pursuing Yoga is again being spoken of in 
another way in order to enjoin 'preservance' and 
'freedom from depression' as the disciplines for 
Yoga: Sah, that; yogah, Yoga, which has the results 
as stated above; yoktavyah, has to be practised; 
niscayena, with perservance; and anirvinnacetasa, 
with an undepressed heart. That which is not (a) 
depressed (nirvinnam) is anirvinnam. What is that? 
The heart. (One has to practise Yoga) with that 
heart which is free from depression. This is the 
meaning. Again, 
6.24 By totally eschewing all desires which arise 
from thoughts, and restraining with the mind itself 
all the organs from every side; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.24 See Commentary under 6.25 
6.25 One should gradually withdraw with the 
intellect endowed with steadiness. Making the 
mind fixed in the Self, one should not think of 
anything whatsoever. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.25 Tyaktva, by eschewing; asesatah, totally, 
without a trace; sarvan, all; the kamam, desires; 
sankalpa-prabhavan, which arise from thoughts; 
and further, viniyamya, restraining; manasa eva, 
with the mind itself, with the mind endued with 
discrimination; indriya-gramam, all the organs; 
samantatah, from every side; uparamet, one should 
withdraw, abstain; sanaih sanaih, gradually, not 
suddenly;-with what?-buddhya, with the intellect;-
possessed of what distinction?-dhrti-grhitaya, 
endowed with steadiness, i.e. with fortitude. Krtva, 
making manah, the mind; atma-samstham, fixed in 
the Self, with the idea, 'The Self alone is all; there is 
nothing apart from It'-thus fixing the mind on the 
Self; na cintayet, one should not think of; kincit api, 
anything whatsoever. Thisis the highest instruction 
about Yoga. 
6.26 (The yogi) should bring (this mind) under the 
subjugation of the Self Itself, by restraining it from 
all those causes whatever due to which the restless, 
unsteady mind wanders away. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.26 In the beginning, the yogi who is thus engaged 
in making the mind established in the Self, etat 
vasamnayet, should bring this (mind) under the 
subjugation; atmani eva, of the Self Itself; niyamya, 
by restraining; etat. it; tatah tatah, from all those 
causes whatever, viz sound etc.; yatah yatah, due 
to which, doe to whatever objects like sound etc.; 
the cancalam, restless, very restless; and therefore 
asthiram, unsteady; manah, mind; niscarati, 
wanders away, goes out due to its inherent defects. 
(It should be restrained) by ascertaining through 
discrimination those causes to be mere 
appearances, and with an attitude of detachment. 
Thus, through the power of practice of Yoga, the 
mind of the yogi merges in the Self Itself. 
6.27 Supreme Bliss comes to this yogi alone whose 
mind has become perfectly tranquil, whose 
(quality of) rajas has been eliminated, who has 
become identified with Brahman, and is taintless. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.27 Uttamam, supreme, unsurpassable; sukham, 
Blisss; upaiti, comes; hi enam yoginam, to this yogi 
alone; prasanta-manasam, whose mind has become 
perfectly tranquil; santa-rejasam, whose (quality 
of) rajas has been eliminated, i.e. whose rajas, viz 
defects such as delusion etc. ['The five klesas, pain bearing obstructions, are: ignorance, egoism, 
attachment, aversion, and clinging to life' 
(P.Y.Su.2.3).] have been destroyed; brahma bhutam, who has become identified with Brahman, 
who is free even while living, who has got the 
certitude that Bramhman is all; and akalmasam, 
who is taintless, free from vice etc. 
6.28 By concentrating his mind constantly thus, the 
taintless yogi easily attains the absolute Bliss of 
contact with Brahman. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.28 Sada yunjan, by constantly concentrating; 
atmanam, his mind; evam, thus, in the process 
stated; vigata-kalmasah, the taintles, sinless yogi, 
free from the obstacles to Yoga; sukhena, easily; 
asnute, attains; atayantam, absolute-that which 
exists by transcending limits-, supreme, 
unsurpassable; sukham, Bliss; of brahma samsparsam, contact with Brahman-the Bliss that is 
in touch [In touch with, i.e. identified with, 
homogeneous with, in essential oneness with.] 
with the supreme Brahman. Now is being shown 
that result of Yoga which is the realization of 
identity with Brahman and which is the cause of 
the extinction of the whole mundane existence . 
[Liberation is conceived of in two ways-total 
cessation of sorrows, and attainment of 
unsurpassable Bliss.] 
6.29 One who has his mind Self-absorbed through 
Yoga, and who has the vision of sameness every where, see this Self existing in everything, and 
every-thing in his Self. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.29 Yoga-yukta-atma, one who has his mind Self absorbed through Yoga, whose mind is merged in 
samadhi; and sarvatra-sama-darsanah, who has the 
vision of sameness everywhere-who has the vision 
(darsana) of sameness (sama-tva), the knowledge 
of identity of the Self and Brahman everywhere 
(sarvatra) without exception, in all divergent 
objects beginning from Brahma to immovable 
things; iksate, sees; atmanam, the Self, his own Self; 
sarva-bhuta-stham, existing in everything; and 
sarva-bhutani, everything from Brahma to a clump 
of grass; unified atmani, in his Self. The fruit of this 
realization of the unity of the Self is being stated: 
6.30 One who sees Me in everything, and sees all 
things in Me-I do not out of his vision, and he also 
is not lost to My vision. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.30 Yah, one who; pasyati, sees; mam, Me, 
Vasudeva, who am the Self of all; sarvatra, in all 
things; ca, and; sees sarvam, all things, all created 
things, beginning from Brahma; mayi, in Me who 
am the Self of all;-aham, I who am God; na 
pranasyami, do not go out; tasya,of his vision-of 
one who has thus realized the unity of the Self; ca 
sah, and he also; na pranasyati, is not lost; me, to 
My vision. That man of realization does not get lost 
to Me, to Vasudeva, because of the indentity 
between him and Me, for that which is called one's 
own Self is surely dear to one, and since it is I alone 
who am the seer of the unity of the Self in all. 
6.31 That yogi who, being established in unity, 
adores Me as existing in all things, he exist in Me in whatever condition he may be. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.31 This being so, i.e. after reiterating (in the first 
line of the present verse) the idea of full realization 
contained in the previous verse, the result of that 
(realization), viz Liberation, is being spoken of (in 
the second line): The yogi, the man of full 
realization; vartate, exists; mayi, in Me, in the 
supreme state of Visnu; sarvatha api, in whatever 
condition; vartamanah, he may be. He is verily 
ever-free. The idea is that he is not obstructed from 
Liberation by anything. Furthermore, 
6.32 O Arjuna, that yogi is considered the best who 
judges what is happiness and sorrow in all beings 
by the same standard as he would apply to 
himself. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.32 Atma-aupamyena: Atma means the self, i.e. 
oneself. That by which a comparison is made is an 
upama. The abstract from of that is aupamya. 
Atma-aupamya means a standard as would be 
applicable to oneself. O Arjuna, yah, he who; 
pasyati, judges; sarvatra, in all beings; samam, by 
the same standard, in the same manner; atma aupamyena, as he would apply to himself-. And 
what does he view with sameness? That is being 
stated: As sukham, happiness, is dear to me, so 
also is happiness agreeable to all creatures. Va, 
and-the word va is (used) in the sense of and; just 
as yadi, whatever; duhkham, sorrow is 
unfavourable, unwelcome to me, so also is sorrow 
unwelcome and unfavourable to all creatures. In 
this way, he looks upon happiness and sorrow as 
pleasant and unpleasant to all bengs, by the same 
standard as he would apply to himself. He does 
not act against anyone. That is , he is non-injurious. 
He who is thus non-injurious and steadfast in full 
Illumination, sah, that yogi; paramah matah, is 
considered as the best among all the yogis. 
Noticing that his Yoga-as spoken of and consisting 
in full Illumination- is hard to acquire, Arjuna, 
with a view to hearing the sure means to its 
attainment, said: 
6.33 Arjuna said -- O Madhusudana (Krsna), this 
Yoga that has been spoken of by You as sameness, 
I do not see its steady continuance, owing to the 
restlessness (of the mind). 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.33 O Madhusudana, ayam, this; yogah, Yoga; yah 
proktah, that has been spoken of; tvaya, by You; 
samyena, as sameness; na pasyami, I do not see, I 
cannot conceive;-what?-etasya, its; sthiram, steady, 
undisturbed; sthitim, continuance; cancalatvat, 
owing to the unsteadiness of the mind, which is 
well known. 
6.34 For, O Krsna, the mind is unsteady, turbulent, 
strong and obstinate. I consider its control to be as 
greatly difficult as of the wind. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.34 Hi, for, O Krsna-the word krsna is derived 
from the root krs [Another derivative meaning 
may be-'the capacity to draw towards Himself all 
glorious things of this and the other world'.], in the 
sense of 'uprooting'; He is Krsna because He 
uproots the defects such as sin etc. of devotees-; 
manah, the mind; is cancalam, unsteady. Not only 
is it very unsteady, it is also pramathi, turbulent. It 
torments, agitates, the body and the organs. It 
brings them under extraneous control. Besides, it is 
balavat, strong, not amenable ot anybody's 
restraint. Again, it is drdham, obstinate, hard as the 
(large shark called) Tantu-naga (also known as 
Varjuna-pasa). Aham, I; manye, consider; tasya, its of the mind which is of this kind; nigrahah, control, 
restraint; to be (suduskaram, greatly difficult;) 
vayoh iva, as of the wind. Control of the wind is 
difficult. I consider the control of the mind to be 
even more difficult than that. This is the idea. 'This 
is just as you say.' 
6.35 The Blessed Lord said -- O mighty-armed one, 
undoubtedly the mind is untractable and restless. 
But, O son of Kunti, it is brought under control 
through practice and detachment. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.35 Mahabaho, O mighty-armed one; asamsayam, 
undoubtedly-there is no doubt with regard to this; 
that the manah, mind; is durnigraham, untractable; 
and calm, restless. Tu, but; it-the modifications of 
the mind in the form of distractions-grhyate, is 
brought under control; abhyasena, through 
practice- abhyasa means repetition of some idea or 
thought of the mind one some mental plane ['Some 
mental plane' suggests some object of 
concentration.]-; and vairagyena, through 
detachment-vairagya means absence of hankering 
for enjoyment of desirable things, seen or unseen, 
as a result of the practice of discerning their defect. 
That mind is thus brought undr control, restrained, 
i.e. completely subdued. By him, however, who 
has not controlled his mind 
6.36 My conviction is that Yoga is difficult to be 
attained by one of uncontrolled mind. But it is 
possible to be attained through the (above) means 
by one who strives and has a controlled mind. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.36 Me, My; matih, conviction; is iti, that; Yoga is 
dusprapah, difficult to be attained; asamyata atmana, by one of uncontrolled mind, by one who 
has not controlled his mind, the internal organ, by 
practice and detachment. Tu, but, on the other 
hand; sakyah, Yoga is possible; avaptum, to be 
attained; yatata, by one who strives, who 
repeatedly makes effort; upayatah, through the 
means described above; and vasyatmany, by one of 
controlled mind, by him whose mind has been 
brought under control through practice and 
detachment. As to that, by accepting the practice of 
Yoga, actions leading to the attainment of this or 
the next world may be renounced by a yogi, and 
yet he may not attain the result of perfection in 
Yoga, i.e. full Illumination, which is the means to 
Liberation. Consequently, at the time of death his 
mind may waver from the path of Yoga. 
Apprehending that he may be thereby ruined. 
6.37 Arjuna said -- O krsna, failing to achieve 
perfection in Yoga, what goal does one attain who, 
though possessed of faith, is not diligent and 
whose mind becomes deflected from Yoga? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.37 O krsna, aprapya, failing to achieve; yoga sam-siddhim, perfection in Yoga, the result of 
Yoga, i.e. full Illumination; kam gatim, what goal; 
gacchati, does one attain; who, though upetah 
sraddhaya, possessed of faith, belief in God and in 
the other world; is ayatih, not diligent, devoid of 
effort on the path of Yoga; and, at the time of 
death, too, calita-manasah, whose mind becomes 
deflected; yogat, from Yoga, (i.e.) whose memory 
has been lost? 
6.38 O Mighty-armed one, fallen from both, 
without support, deluded on the path to Brahman, 
does he not get ruined like a scattered cloud? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.38 Mahabaho, O Mighty-armed one; ubhaya vibhrastah, fallen from both, having fallen from the 
Path of Action and the Path of Yoga; apratisthah, 
without support; vimudhah, deluded-having 
become deluded; brahmanah pathi, on the path of 
Brahman, on the path leading to Brahman; kaccit 
na, does he not; nasyati, get ruined; iva, like; a 
chinna-abhram, scattered cloud? Or is it that he 
does not? 
6.39 O Krsna, You should totally eradicate this 
doubt of mine. For, none other than Yourself can 
be the dispeller of this doubt! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.39 O krsna, arhasi, You should; asesatah, totally; 
chettum, eradicate, remove; etat, this; samsayam, 
doubt; me, of mine. Hi, for; na tvad anyah, none 
other than You, be he a sage or a god; upapadyate, 
can be; chetta, the despeller, the destroyer; asya, of 
this; samsayasya, doubt. Therefore you Yourself 
should dispel (the doubt). This is the meaning. 
6.40 The Blessed Lord said -- O Partha, there is 
certainly no ruin for him here or hereafter. For, no 
one engaged in good meets with a deplorable end, 
My son! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.40 O Partha, eva vidyate, there is certainly; na 
vinasah, no ruin; tasya, for him; iha, here, in this 
world; or amutra, hereafter, in the other world. 
Ruin means a birth inferior to the previous one; 
that is not there for one who has fallen from Yoga. 
Hi, for; na kascit, no one; kalyana-krt, engaged in 
good; gacchati, meets with; durgatim, a deplorable 
end; tata, My son! A father is called tata because he 
perpetuates himself (tanoti) through the son. Since 
the father himself becomes the son, therefore the 
son also is called tata. A disciple is called putra 
(son). [Sri krsna addressed Arjuna thus because the 
latter was his disciple.] But what happens to him? 
6.41 Attaining the worlds of the righteous, and 
residing there for eternal years, the man fallen 
from Yoga is born in the house of the pious and the 
properous. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.41 Prapya, attaining, reaching, lokan, the worlds; 
punya-krtam, of the righteous, of the performers of 
the Horse-sacrifice, etc.; and usitva, residing there, 
enjoying the stay; for sasvatih, eternal; samah, 
years; (then,) when the period of enjoyment is over, 
the yoga-bhrastah, man fallen from Yoga, the one 
who had set out on the path Yoga, i.e. a monk-as 
understood from the force of the context [From 
Arjuna's question it minght appear that he was 
asking about the fate of people who fall from both 
the paths, viz that of Karma and of Meditation. But 
the possibility of getting ruined by performing 
actios (rites and duties) according to Vedic 
instructions does not arise, since their results are 
inevitable. However, the question of ruin is 
relevant in the case of a monk, for on the one hand 
he has renounced actions, and on the other he may 
fail to attain perfection in Yoga in the present life. 
Hence, the Lord's answer relates to the fall and 
ruin of a monk alone.]; abhijayate, is born; gehe, in 
the house; sucinam, of the pious, who perform 
actions according to scriptural instructions; and 
srimatam, who are prosperous. 
6.42 Or he is born in the family of wise yogis 
[Persons possessing knowledge of Brahman. (S. 
concedes that some rare householders also can 
have this knowledge, and he cites the instances of 
Vasistha, Agastya, Janaka and Asvapati of olden 
days, and Vacaspati and the author of Khanada of 
recent times.)] only. Such a birth as is of this kind is 
surely more difficult to get in the world. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.42 Athava, or; bhavati, he is born; kule, in the 
family; dhimatam, of wise; yoginam, yogis; eva, 
only, who are poor-which is different from the 
family of the prosperous. Etat janma, such a birth; 
yat idrsam, as is of this kind-a birth that is in the 
family of poor yogis, in a family as described; is hi, 
surely; durlabha-taram, more difficult to get, as 
compared with the earlier one; loke, in the world. 
Becuase, 
6.43 There he becomes endowed with that wisdom 
acquired in the previous body. and he strives more 
than before for perfection, O scion of the Kuru 
dynasty. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.43 Tatra, there, in the family of yogis; labhate, 
tam buddhisamyogam, he becomes endowed with 
that wisdom; paurva-dehikam, acquired in the 
previous body. And yatate, he strives; bhuyah, 
more intensely; tatah, than before, more intensely 
than that tendency acquired in the previous birth; 
samsiddau, for, for the sake of, perfection; kuru nandana, O scion of the Kuru dynasty. How does 
he become endowed with the wisdom acquired in 
the previous body? That is being answered: 
6.44 For, by that very past practice, he is carried 
forward even in spite of himself! Even a seeker of 
Yoga transcends the result of the performance of 
Vedic rituals! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.44 Hi, for; tena eva, by that very; purva abhyasena, past practice-the powerful habit 
formed in the past life; hiryate, he, the yogi who 
had fallen from Yoga, is carried forward; avasah 
api, even inspite of himself. If he had not 
committed any act which could be characterized as 
unrigtheous etc. and more powerful than the 
tendency created by the practice of Yoga, then he is 
carried forward by the tendency created by the 
practice of Yoga. If he had committed any 
unrighteous act which was more powerful, then, 
even the tendency born of Yoga gets surely 
overpowered. But when that is exhausted, the 
tendency born of Yoga begins to take effect by 
itself. The idea is that it does not get destroyed, 
even though it may lie in abeyance over a long 
period. Jijnasuh api, even a seeker; yogasya, of 
Yoga from the force of the context, the person 
implied is a monk who had engaged in the path of 
Yoga with a desire to known his true nature, but 
had falled from Yoga-; ;even he, ativartate, 
trascends-will free himself from; sabda-brahma, 
the result of the performance of Vedic ritual. What 
to speak of him who after understanding Yoga, 
may undertake it with steadfastness! And why is 
the state of Yoga higher? 
6.45 However, the yogi, applying himself 
assiduously, becoming purified from sin and 
attaining perfection through many births, thereby 
acheives the highest Goal. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.45 The yogi, the man of Knowledge; yatamanah, 
applying himself; prayatnat, assiduously, i.e. 
striving more intensely; and as a result, 
samsuddha-kilbisah, becoming purified from sin; 
and aneka-janma-samsiddhah, attaining perfection 
through many births- gathering together 
tendencies little by little in many births, and 
attaining perfection through that totality of 
impressions acquired in many births; tatah, 
thereby coming to have full Illumination; yati, 
achieves; the param, highest, most perfect; ;gatim, 
Goal. Since this is so, therefore. 
6.46 A yogi is higher than men of austerity; he is 
considered higher even than men of knowledge. 
The yogi is also higher than men of action. 
Therefore, O Arjuna, do you become a yogi. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.46 A yogi is adhikah, higher; tapasvibhyah, than 
men of austerity; he is matah, considered; adhikah, 
higher than, superior to; api, even; jnanibhyah, 
men of knowledge. Jnana here means scriptural 
learning. (A yogi is superior) to even those who 
possess that (learning). The yogi is adhikah, higher, 
greater; karmibhyah, than men of action-karma 
means Agnihotra etc.; (greater) than those who 
adhere to them. Since this is so, tasmat, therefore; 
O Arjuna, bhava, do you become a yogi. 
6.47 Even among all the yogis, he who adores Me 
with his mind fixed on Me and with faith,he is 
considered by Me to be the best of the yogis. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
6.47 Api, even; sarvesam yoginam, among all the 
yogis, among those who are immersed in 
meditation on Rudra, Aditya, and others; yah, he 
who; bhajate, adores; mam, Me; antaratmana,with 
his mind; madgatena, fixed on Me, concentrated on 
Me who am Vasudeva; and sraddhavan, with faith, 
becoming filled with faith; sah, he; is matah, 
considered; me, by Me; to be yukta-tamah, the best 
of the yogis, engaged in Yoga most intensely. [It 
has been shown thus far that Karma-yoga has 
monasticism as its ultimate culmination. And in 
the course of expounding Dhyana-yoga together 
with its ausxiliaries, and instructing about the 
means to control the mind, the Lord rules out the 
possibility of absolute ruin for a person fallen from 
Yoga. He has also stated that steadfastness in 
Knowledge is for a man who knows the meaning 
of the word tvam (thou) (in 'Thou are That'). All 
these instructions amount to declaring that 
Liberation comes from the knowledge of the great 
Upanisadic saying, 'Thou art That.'] 
7.1 The Blessed Lord said -- O Partha, hear how 
you, having the mind fixed on Me, practising the 
Yoga of Meditation and taking refuge in Me, will 
know Me with certainly and in fulness. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.1 O Partha, mayi asaktamanah, having the mind 
fixed on Me- one whose mind (manah) is fixed 
(asakta) on Me (mayi) who am the supreme God 
possessed on the qualification going to be spoken 
of-. Yogam yunjan, practising the Yoga of 
Meditation, concentrating the mind-. Madasrayah, 
taking refuge in Me-one to whom I Myself, the 
supreme Lord, am the refuge (asraya) is 
madasrayah-. Anyone who hankers after some 
human objective resorts to some rite such as the 
Agnihotra etc., austerity or charity, which is the 
means to its attainment. This yogi, however, 
accepts only Me as his refuge; rejecting any other 
means, he keeps his mind fixed on Me alone. Srnu, 
hear; tat, that, which is being spoken of by Me; as 
to yatha, how, the process by which; you who, 
having become thus, jnasyasi, will know; mam, 
Me; asamsayam, with certainty, without doubt, 
that the Lord is such indeed; and samagram, in 
fullness, possessed of such qualities as greatness, 
strength, power, majesty, etc. [Strength-physical; 
power-mental; etc. refers to omniscience and will.] 
in their fullness. 
7.2 I shall tell you in detail of this Knowledge 
which is combined with realization, [From the 
statement, 'jnasyasi, you will know', in the earlier 
verse, one may conclude that the Lord is speaking 
of indirect or theoretical knowledge. The word 
'idam, this' rules out such a conclusion; and it has 
also been said that this Knowledge is 'savijnanam, 
combined with direct experienece, realization'; it is 
Consciousness.] after experience which there 
remains nothing else here to be known again. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.2 Aham, I; vaksyami, shall tell; te, you; asesatah, 
in detail, fully; of that (Knowledge) about Myself, 
which is idam, this; jnanam, Knowlege; which is 
savijnanam, combined with realization, associated 
with personal enlightenment; yat jnatva, after 
experiencing which Knowledge; avasisyate, there 
remains; na anyat, nothing else, anything that can 
be a means to human ends; jnatavyam, to be 
known; bhuyah, again; iha, here. (In this way) the 
Lord praises that Knowledge which is intended to 
be spoken, in order ot draw the attention of the 
hearer. Thus, 'he who knows Me in reality becomes 
omniscient.' This is the idea. Therefore Knowledge 
is difficult to attain because of its superexcellent 
result. How so? This is being answered: 
7.3 Among thousands of men a rare one 
endeavours for perfection. Even of the perfected 
ones who are diligent, one perchance knows Me in 
truth. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.3 Sahasresu manusyanam, among thousands, 
among a multitude of men; kascit, a rare one; 
yatati, endeavours; siddhaye, for perfection. [For 
perfection: for the rise of Knowledge through the 
purification of the mind.] Siddhanam api, even of 
the perfected one; yatatam, who are diligent-they 
(those diligent ones themselves) being (considered 
to be) verily perfect because they are striving for 
Liberation; of them-; kascit, one perchance, indeed; 
vetti, knows; mam, Me; tattvatah, in truth. Having 
drawn the attention of the hearer by arousing 
interest, the Lord says: 
7.4 This Prakrti of Mine is divided eight-fold thus: 
earth, water, fire, air, space, mind, intellect and also 
egoism. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.4 Iyam, this; prakrtih, Prakrti, [Prakrti here does 
not mean the Pradhana of the Sankhyas.] the 
divine power called Maya; me, of Mine, as 
described; bhinna, is divided; astadha, eight-forl; 
iti, thus: bhumih, earth-not the gross earth but the 
subtle element called earth, this being understood 
from the statement, 'Prakrti (of Mine) is divided 
eight-fold'. Similarly, the subtle elements alone are 
referred to even by the words water etc. Apah, 
water; analah, fire; vayuh, air; kham, space; manah, 
mind. By 'mind' is meant its source, egoism. By 
buddhih, intellect, is meant the principle called 
mahat [Mahat means Hiranyagarbha, or Cosmic 
Intelligence.] which is the source of egoism. By 
ahankarah, egoism, is meant the Unmanifest, 
associated [Associated, i.e. of the nature of.] with 
(Cosmic) ignorance. As food mixed with position is 
called poison, similarly the Unmainfest, which is 
the primordial Cause, is called egoism since it is 
imbued with the impressions resulting from 
egoism; and egoism is the impelling force (of all). It 
is indeed seen in the world that egoism is the 
impelling cause behind all endeavour. 
7.5 O mighty-armed one, this is the inferior 
(Prakrti). Know the other Prakrti of Mine which, 
however, is higher than this, which has taken the 
from of individual souls, and by which this world 
is uphelp. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.5 O mighty-armed one, iyam, this; is apara, the 
inferior (Prakrti)-not the higher, (but)-the impure, 
the source of evil and having the nature of worldly 
bondage. Viddhi, know; anyam, the other, pure; 
prakrtim, Prakrti; me, of Mine, which is essentially 
Myself; which, tu, however;is param, higher, more 
exalted; itah, than this (Prakrti) already spoken of; 
Jiva-bhutam, which has taken the form of the 
individual souls, which is characterized as 'the 
Knower of the body (field)', and which is the cause 
of sustenance of life; and yaya, by which Prakriti; 
idam, this; jagat, world; dharyate, is upheld, by 
permeating it. 
 
7.6 Understand thus that all things (sentient and 
insentient) have these as their source. I am the 
origin as also the end of the whole Universe. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.6 Upadharaya, understand; iti, thus; that sarvani, 
all; bhutani, things; etat-yonini, have these (etat) as 
their source (yoni)-things that have these lower 
and higher Prakrtis, charcterized as the 'field' and 
the 'Knower of the field (body)', as their source are 
etat-yonini. Since My two Prakrtis are the source, 
the cause of all things, therefore, aham, I; am the 
prabhavah, origin; tatha, as also; the pralayah, end, 
the termination; krtsnasya, of the whole; jagatah, 
Universe. The maning is this: I, who am the 
ominscient God, am the source of the Univese 
through My two Prakrtis. Since this is so, therefore-
7.7 O Dhananjaya, there is nothing else whatsoever 
higher than Myself. All this is strung on Me like 
pearls on a string. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.7 O Dhananjaya, asti, there is; na anyat kincit, 
nothing else whatsoever, no other cause; 
parataram, higher; mattah, than Me, the supreme 
God; i.e. I Myself am the source of the world. Since 
this is so, therefore, sarvam, all; idam, this, all 
things, the Universe; protam,is strung, woven, 
connected, i.e. transfixed; mayi, on Me, the 
supreme God; like cloth in the warp, [Like cloth 
formed by threads constituting its warp and woof.] 
and iva, like; maniganah, peals; sutre,on a string. 
'What qualities are You endowed with, by virtue of 
which all this is strung on You? This is being 
answered: 
7.8 O son of Kunti, I am the taste of water, I am the 
effulgence of the moon and the sun; (the letter) Om 
in all the Vedas, the sound in space, and manhood 
in men. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.8 Kaunteya, O son of Kunti, aham, I; am rasah, 
the taste, which is the essence of water. The idea is 
that water is depedent on Me who am its essence. 
This is how it is to be understood in every case. 
Just as I am the essence of water, similarly, asmi, I 
am; the prabha, effulgence; sasi-suryayoh, of the 
moon and the sun; pranavah, (the letter) Om; 
sarva-vedesu, in all the Vedas. All the Vedas are 
established on Me who am that Om. So also (I am) 
sabdah, the sound; khe, in space, as the essence. 
Space is established on Me who am that (sound). In 
the same way, nrsu, in men; (I am) paurusam, 
manhood- the quality of being man, from which 
arises the idea of manhood. Men are established on 
Me who am such. 
7.9 I am also the sweet fragrance in the earth; I am 
the brillinace in the fire, and the life in all beings; 
and I am the austerity of the ascetics. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.9 I am also the punyah, sweet; gandhah, 
fragrance; prthivyam, in the earth. The earth is 
dependent on Me who am its fragrance. The 
natural sweetness of smell in the earth is cited by 
way of suggesting sweetness of taste of water etc. 
as well. But foulness of smell etc. is due to contact 
with particular things, resulting from nescience, 
unholiness, etc. of worldly people. Ca, and ; asmi, I 
am; the tejah, brilliance; vibhavasau, in fire; so also 
(I am) the jivanam, life-that by which all creatures 
live; sarva-bhutesu, in all beings. And I am the 
tapah, austerity; tapasvisu, of ascetics. Ascetics are 
established in Me who am that austerity. 
7.10 O Partha, know Me to be the eternal Seed of 
all beings. I am the intellect of the intelligent, I am 
the courage of the courageous. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.10 O Partha, viddhi, know, mam, Me; to be the 
sanatanam, eternal; bijam, seed, the source of 
growth; sarva-bhutanam, of all beings. Besides, I 
am the buddhih, intellect, the power of 
discrimination of the mind; buddhimatam, of the 
intelligent, of people having the power of 
discrimination. I am the tejah, courage; tejasvinam, 
of the courageous, of those possessed of that. 
7.11 And of the strong I am the strength which is 
devoid of passion and attachment. Among 
creatures I am desire which is not contrary to 
righteousness, O scion of the Bharata dyansty. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.11 I am the balam, strength, ability, virility; 
balavatam, of the strong. That strength, again, is 
kama-raga-vivarjitam, devoid of passion and 
attachment. Kamah is passion, hankering for things 
not at hand. Ragah is attachment, fondness for 
things acquired. I am the strength that is devoid of 
them and is necessary merely for the maintenance 
of the body etc., but not that strength of the 
worldly which causes hankering and attachment. 
Further, bhutesu, among creatures; I am that 
kamah, desire-such desires as for eating, drinking, 
etc. which are for the mere maintenance of the 
body and so on; which is dharma-aviruddhah, not 
contrary to righteousness, not opposed to 
scriptural injunctions; bharatarsabha, O scion of 
the Bharata dynasty. Moreover, 
 
7.12 Those things that indeed are made of (the 
quality of ) sattva, and those things that are made 
of (the quality of) rajas and tamas, know them to 
have sprung from Me alone. However, I am not in 
them; they are in Me! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.12 Ye bhavah, those things; sattvikah eva, that 
indeed are made of (the quality of) sattva; and ye 
rajasah, those that are made (of the quality) of 
rajas; and tamasah, those that are made of (the 
quality of) tamas-whatever things are made (of 
sattva, rajas and tamas) according to the creatures's 
own actions: viddhi, know; tan, them, all without 
exception; mattah eva iti, to have sprung from Me 
alone when they come into being. Although they 
originate from Me, still, tu, however; aham, I; am 
na tesu, not in them-I am not subject to them, not 
under their control, as are the transmigrating 
bengs. Te, they, again; mayi, are in Me, subject to 
Me, under My control. [For sattva, rajas, and tamas 
see note under 2.45 as also Chapters 14, 17 and 18.-
Tr.] 'The world does not know Me, the supreme 
Lord, even though I am of this kind, and am 
eternal, pure, intelligent and free by nature, [See 
note on p.4.-Tr.] the Self of all beings, free from all 
qualities, the cause of burning away the seed of the 
evil of transmigration!'-in this way the Lord 
expresses regret. And what is the source of that 
ignorance in the world? That is being stated: 
7.13 All this world, deluded as it is by these three 
things made of the gunas (qualities), does not 
know Me who am transcendental to these and 
undecaying. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.13 Sarvam, all; idam, this; jagat, world, the 
aggregate of creatures; mohitam, deluded as it is made to have indiscrimination; ebhih, by these; 
aforesaid tribhih, three; bhavaih, things, in the 
forms of attachment, repulsion, delusion, etc; and 
gunamayaih, made of the gunas, of the 
transformations of the gunas; na abhijanati, does 
not know; mam, Me; who am param, 
transcendental to, distinct, different; ebhyah, from 
these gunas as referred to above; and am avyayam, 
undecaying, i.e. free from all (the six kinds of) 
changes in things, viz birth etc. [See note on p.38.-
Tr.] How, again, do they cross over this divine 
Maya of Visnu, constituted by the three gunas? 
That is being stated: 
7.14 Since this divine Maya of Mine which is 
constituted by the gunas is difficult to cross over, 
(therefore) those who take refuge in Me alone cross 
over this Maya. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.14 Hi, since; esa, this, aforesaid; daivi, divine; 
Maya mama, of Mine, of God, of Visnu, which 
(Maya) is My own; and which is guna-mayi, 
constituted by the gunas; is duratyaya, difficult to 
cross over; therefore, this being so, ye, those who; 
wholeheartedly prapadyante, take refuge; mam 
eva, in Me alone, in Me who am the Master of 
Maya and who am their own Self, by giving up all 
forms of rites and duties; te, they; taranti, cross 
over; etam, this; mayam, Maya, which deludes all 
beings. That is to say, they become freed from the 
bondage of the world. 'If it is that those who resort 
to You cross over this Maya, why then do not all 
take refuge in You alone?' This is being answered: 
7.15 The foolish evildoers, who are the most 
depraved among men, who are deprived of (their) 
wisdom by Maya, and who resort to demoniacal 
ways, do not take refuge in Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.15 Mudhah, the foolish; duskrtinah, evildoers, 
sinners; who are nara-adhamah, the most 
depraved among men; who are also apa-hrta jnanah, deprived of, despoiled of (their) wisdom; 
mayaya, by Maya; and asritah, who resort to; 
asuram bhavam, demoniacal, ways, such as 
cruelty, untruthfulness, etc.; na, do not; 
prapadyante, take refuge; man, in Me, the supreme 
God. 
7.16 O Arjuna, foremost of the Bharata dynasty, 
four classes of people of virtuous deeds adore Me: 
the afflicted, the seeker of Knowledge, the seeker of 
wealth and the man of Knowledge. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.16 Again, O Arjuna, foremost of the Bharata 
dynasty, caturvidhah, four classes; of janah, 
people; who are eminent among human beings and 
are pious in actions, and are sukrtinah, of virtuous 
deeds; bhajante, adore; mam, Me; artah, the 
afflicted-one who is overcome by sorrow, who is in 
distress, ['One who, being in distress and seeking 
to be saved from it, takes refuge (in Me).'] being 
over-whelmed by thieves, tigers, disease, etc.; 
jijnasuh, the seeker of Knowledge, who wants to 
know the reality of the Lord; artharthi, the seeker 
of wealth; and jnani, the man of Knowledge, [i.e. 
one who, already having intellectual knowledge, 
aspires for Liberation.] who knows the reality of 
Visnu. 
7.17 Of them, the man of Knowledge, endowed 
with constant steadfastness and one-pointed 
devotion, excels. For I am very much dear to the 
man of Knowledge, and he too is dear to Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.17 Tesam, of them, among the four; jnani, the 
man of Knowledge, the knower of Reality, is nitya yuktah, endowed with constant steadfastness as a 
result of being a knower of Reality; and he also 
becomes eka-bhaktih, endowed with one-pointed 
devotion, because he finds no one else whom he 
can adore. Consequently, that person of one pointed devotion visisyate, excels, becomes 
superior, i.e. he surpasses (the others). Hi, since; I, 
the Self, am priyah, dear; jnaninah, to the man of 
Knowledge; therefore aham, I; am atyartham, very 
much; priyah, dear to him. It is indeed a well 
known fact in the world that the Self is dear. The 
meaning, therefore, is that Vasudeva, being the Self 
of the man of Knowledge, is dear to him. And sah, 
he, the man of Knowledge, being the very Self of 
Me who am Vasudeva; is very much priyah, dear; 
mama, to Me. 'If that be so, then the other three-the 
afflicted and the others-are not dear to Vasudeva?' 
'This is not so!' 'What then?' 
7.18 All of these, indeed, are noble, but the man of 
Knowledge is the very Self. (This is) My opinion. 
For, with a steadfast mind, he is set on the path 
leading to Me alone who am the super-excellent 
Goal. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.18 Sarve, ete, all of these three, without 
exception; are eva, indeed, udarah, noble, i.e.; they 
are verily dear to Me. For, no devotee of Mine can 
become disagreeable to Me who am Vasudeva. But 
the man of Knowledge becomes very much dear. 
This is the difference. Why is this so? In answer the 
Lord says: Tu but; jnani, the man of Knowledge; is 
atma eva, the very Self, not different from Me. This 
is me, My; matam, opinion, conviction. Hi, for; 
yuktatma, with a steadfast mind-having his mind 
absorbed in the idea, 'I am verily Vasudeva, the 
Lord, and none else', that man of Knowledge 
asthitah, is set on the path leading to, he is engaged 
in ascending to, going to; mam eva, Me alone, to 
the supreme Brahman; who am the anuttamam 
gatim, super-excellent Goal to be reached. The man 
of Knowledge is being eulogized again: 
7.19 At the end of many births the man of 
Knowledge attains Me, (realizing) that Vasudeva is 
all. Such a high-souled one is very rare. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.19 Ante, at the end, after the completion; 
bahunam, of many; janmanam, births, which 
becme the repository for accumulating [Ast. omits 
this word.-Tr.] the tendencies leading to 
Knowledge; jnanavan, the man of Knowledge, who 
has got hiis Knowledge matured; directly 
prapadyate, attains; mam, Me, Vasudeva, who am 
the inmost Self; (realizing)-in what way?-iti, that; 
Vasudeva is sarvam, all. Sah, such a one, who 
realizes Me [Here Ast. adds the word Narayana.-
Tr.] thus as the Self of all; is mahatma, a high souled one. There is none else who can equal or 
excel him. Therefore he is su-durlabhah, very rare 
among thousands of men, as it has been said (in 
verse 3). The reason why one does not realize that 
all this is verily Vasudeva, the Self, is being stated: 
7.20 People, deprived of their wisdom by desires 
for various objects and guided by their own nature, 
resort to other deities following the relevant 
methods. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.20 People, hrta-jnanah, deprived of their wisdom, 
deprived of their discriminating knowledge; taih 
taih kamaih, by desires for various objects, such as 
progeny, cattle, heaven, etc.; and niyatah, guided, 
compelled; svaya prakrtya, by their own nature, by 
particular tendencies gathered in the past lives; 
prapadyante, resort; anya-devatah, to other deities, 
who are different from Vasudeva, the Self; asthaya, 
following taking the help of; tam tam niyamam,the 
relevant methods-those processes that are well 
known for the adoration of the concerned deities. 
 
7.21 Whichever form (of a deity) any devotee 
wants to worship with faith, that very firm faith of 
his I strengthen. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.21 Yam yam, whichever; tanum, form of a deity; 
yah, any covetous person- among these people 
with desires; who, being endowed sraddhaya, with 
faith; and being a bhaktah, devotee; icchati, wants; 
arcitum, to worship; tam eva, that very; acalam, 
firm, steady; sraddham, faith; tasya, of his, of that 
particular covetous person-that very faith with 
which he desires to worship whatever form of a 
deity, in which (worship) he was earlier engaged 
under the impulsion of his own nature-; [Ast. takes 
the portion 'svabhavatah yo yam devata-tanum 
sraddhaya arcitum icchati' with the next verse.-Tr.] 
vidadhami, I strengthen. 
7.22 Being imbued with that faith, that person 
engages in worshipping that form, and he gets 
those very desired results therefrom as they are 
dispensed by Me alone. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.22 Yuktah,being endued; taya, with that; 
sraddhaya, faith, as granted by Me; sah, that 
person; ihate, engages in; radhanam, i.e. 
aradhanam, worshipping; tasyah, that form of the 
deity. And labhate, he gets; tan hi, those very; 
kaman, desired results; tatah, there-from, from that 
form of the deity which was worshipped; as 
vihitan, they are dispensed, meted out; maya eva, 
by Me alone, who am the omniscient, supreme 
God, because I am possessed of the knowledge of 
the apportionment of the results of actions. The 
meaning his that he surely gets those desired 
results since they are ordained by God. If the 
reading be hitan (instead of hi tan), then the 
beneficence (-hita means beneficent-) of the desired 
result should be interpreted in a figurative sense, 
for desires cannot be beneficial to anyone! 
 
7.23 That result of theirs who are of poor intellect is 
indeed limited. The worshippers of gods go to the 
gods. My devotees go to Me alone. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.23 Since those non-discriminating men with 
desires are engaged in disciplines for limited 
results, therefore, tat phalam, that result; tesam, of 
theirs; alpamedhasam, who are of poor intellect, of 
poor wisdom; antavat tu bhavati, is limited, 
ephemeral, indeed. Deva-yajah, the worshippers of 
gods; yanti, go; devan, to the gods. Madbhaktah, 
My devotees; yanti, to; mam api, to Me alone. 
'Thus, though the effort needed is the same, they 
do not resort to me alone for the unlimited result. 
Alas! they are surely in a pitiable condition.' In this 
manner the Lord expresses his compassion. 'Why 
do they not take refuge in Me alone?' The answer 
is: 
7.24 The unintelligent, unaware of My supreme 
state which is immutable and unsurpassable, think 
of Me as the unmanifest that has become manifest. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.24 Abuddhayah, the unintelligent, the non discriminating ones; ajanantah, unaware; mama, of 
My; param, supreme; bhavam, state, My reality as 
the supreme Self; which is avyayam, immutable, 
undecaying; and anuttanam, unsurpassable; 
manyante, think; mam, of Me; as avyaktam, the
unmanifest, the invisible; apannam, that has 
become; vyaktim, manifest, visible, at present [At 
present, after being embodied as an Incarnation.]-
though I am the ever well-known God. They think 
so because they are unaware of My reality. This is 
the idea. What is the reason for their ignorance? 
This is being stated: 
 
7.25 Being enveloped by yoga-maya, I do not 
become manifest to all. This deluded world does 
not know Me who am birthless and undecaying. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.25 Yoga-maya-samavrtah, being enveloped by 
yoga-maya-Yoga means the combination, the 
coming together, of the (three) gunas; that 
(combination) is itself maya, yoga-maya; being 
enveloped, i.e. veiled, by that yoga-maya; aham, I; 
na prakasah, do not become manifest; sarvasya, to 
all, to the world. The idea is that I become manifest 
only to some devotees of Mine. For this very 
reason, ayam, this; mudhah, deluded; lokah, 
world; na abhijanati, does not know; mam, Me; 
who am ajam, birthless; and avyayam, undecaying. 
[In verse 13 the reason for the non-realization of 
the supreme, unqualified Brahman was stated. The 
present verse states the reason for the non realization of the qualified Brahman.] 'That yoga maya, because of My being covered by which the 
world does not know Me- that yoga-maya, since it 
belongs to Me, does not obstruct the knowlege of 
Me who am God, the possessor of maya, just as the 
magic of any other magician does not cover his 
knowledge.' Since this is so, therefore 
7.26 O Arjuna, I know the past and the present as 
also the future beings; but no one knows Me! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.26 O Arjuna, aham, I, however; veda, know; 
samatitani, the past beings; and vartamanani, the 
present. I know ca, also; bhavisyani, the future; 
bhutani, beings. Tu, but; na kascana, no one; veda, 
knows; mam, Me. Except the one person who is 
My devotee and has taken refuge in Me, no one 
adores Me, jus because he does not know My 
reality. 'What, again,is the obstruction to knowing 
Your reality, being prevented by which the 
creatures that are born do not know You?' In 
anticipation of such a question, the Lord says this: 
7.27 O scion of the Bharata dynasty, O destroyer of 
foes, due to the delusion of duality arising from 
likes and dislikes, all creatures become bewildered 
at the time of their birth. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.27 Iccha-dvesa-samutthena, by what arises from 
likes and dislikes: iccha, likes, and dvesa, dislikes, 
are iccha-dvesau; anything arising from them is 
icchadvesa-samutthah. (Creatures are duluded) by 
that. By what? When that is thus sought to be 
known in particular, the Lord answers: dvandva mohena, by the delusion of duality. Delusion 
(moha) that originates from duality (advandva) is 
dvandva-moha. Those very likes and dislikes, 
which are mutually opposed like heat and cold, 
which relate to happiness and sorrow and their 
causes, and which come into association with all 
beings in due course, are termed as duality (and 
this deludes all creatures). As regards them, when 
likes and dislikes arise from the experience of 
happiness, sorrow and their causes, then, by 
bringing the wisdom of all beings under their 
control, they create bewilderment which is the 
cause of the impediment to the rise of knowledg 
about the reality of Self, the suprem Truth. Indeed, 
exact knowledg about objects even in the external 
world does not arise in one whose mind is 
overpowered by the defects, viz likes and dislikes. 
It goes without saying that knowledge of the 
indwelling Self, beset with many obstacles as it is, 
does not arise in a completely bewildered person 
whose intelligence has been overcome by them. 
Therefore, bharata, O scion of the Bharata dynasty; 
owing to that delusion of duality arising from likes 
and dislikes, sarvabhutani, all creatures become 
deluded. Parantapa, O destroyer of foes; they yanti 
sammoham, become bewildered, come under 
delusion; sarge, at the time of their birth, i.e. at the 
time of their origination. The idea is that all 
creatures that come into being do so prepossessed 
by delusion. 'Since this is so, therefore all creatures, 
being deluded and having their wisdom 
obstructed by that delusion of duality, do not 
know Me who am their Self. Hence, they do not 
adore Me as their Self.' 'Who, again, are those that, 
becoming free from the delusion of duality, come 
to know You, and adore You as the Self in 
accordance with the scriptures?' In order to 
elaborate the subject enquired about, it is being 
said: 
 
7.28 On the other hand, those persons who are of 
virtuous deeds, whose sin has come to an end, 
they, being free from the delusion of dulaity and 
firm in their convictions, adore Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.28 Yesam jananam, those persons; tu, on the 
other hand; punya-karmanam, who are of virtuous 
deeds, in whom exist virtuous deeds that are the 
cause of purification of the mind; whose papam, 
sin; antagatam, has come to an end, is almost 
eradicated, attenuated; te, they; dvandva-moha nirmuktah, being free from the delusion of duality 
as described; and drdhavratah, firm in their 
convictions-those who [Here Ast. adds, 'sarva parityaga-vratena, through the vow of 
relinquishing everything'.-Tr.] have the firm 
knowledge that the supreme Reality is such alone 
and not otherwise are called drdhavratah-; 
bhajante, adore; mam, Me, the supreme Self. Why 
do they worship? This is being answered: 
 
7.29 Those who strive by resorting to Me for 
becoming free from old age and death, they know 
that Brahman, everything about the individual Self, 
and all about actions. [They know Brahman as 
being all the individual entities and all actions. 
This verse prescribes meditation on the qualified 
Brahman for aspirants of the middle class. Verses 
beginning with the 14the speak about the 
reaization of the unqualified Brahman by aspirants 
of the highest class.] 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.29 Ye, those who; yatanti, strive; asritya, by 
resorting; mam, to Me, the supreme God, by 
having their minds absorbed in Me; jara-marana moksaya, for becoming free from old age and 
death; te, they; viduh, know; tat, that; brahma, 
Brahman, which is the Supreme; they know 
krtsnam, everything; about adhyatmam, the 
individual Self, that indwelling intity; ca, and; they 
know akhiliam, all; about karma, actions. 
 
7.30 Those who know me as existing in the 
physical and the divine planes, and also in the 
context of the sacrifice, they of concentrated minds 
know Me even at the time of death. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
7.30 Ye, those who; viduh, know; mam, Me; sa adhi-bhuta-adhidaivam, as existing in the physical 
and the divine planes; ca, and also; sa-adhiyajnam, 
as existing in the context of the sacrifice; te, they; 
yukta-cetasah, of concentrated minds-those who 
have their minds absorbed in God; viduh, know; 
mam, Me; api ca, even; prayanakale, at the time of 
death. [For those who are devoted to God, there is 
not only the knowledge of Brahman as identified 
with all individuals and all actions (see previous 
verse), but also the knowledge of It as existing in 
all things on the physical, the divine and the 
sacrificial planes. Those who realize Brhaman as 
existing in the context of all the five, viz of the 
individual, of actions, of the physical,of the divine, 
and of the sacrifices-for them with such a 
realization there is no forgetting, loss of awareness, 
of Brahman even at the critical moment of death.] 
 
8.1 Arjuna said -- O supreme person, what is that 
Brahman? What is that which exists in the 
individual plane? What is action? And what is that 
which is said to exist in the physical plane? What is 
that which is said to be existing in the divine 
plane? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.1 See Commentary under 8.2. 
 
8.2 O Madhusudana, how, and who, is the entity 
existing in the sacrifice here in this body? And at 
the time of death, how are You to be known by 
people of concentrated minds? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.2 In order to settle these questions seriatim -
8.3 The Blessed Lord said -- The Immutable is the 
supreme Brahman; self-hood is said to the entity 
present in the individual plane. By action is meant 
the offerings which bring about the origin of the 
existence of things. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.3 Aksaram means that which does not perish (na 
ksarati), the supreme Self. This agrees with the 
Upanisadic text, 'Under the mighty rule of this 
Immutable, O Gargi...' (Br. 3.8.9). And (the letter) 
Om is not accept here [as the meaning of aksara 
(lit. letter)], because of its being mentioned (as a 
letter) later on in, 'The single letter Om, which is 
Brahman' (13). Besides, the adjective 'supreme' is 
more apporpriate with regard to the absolute, 
immutable Brahman. By svabhava, self-hood, is 
meant the eixtence of that very supreme Brahman 
in every body as the indwelling Self. Svabhavah 
ucyate, self-hood is said to be, is referred to by the 
word; adhyatmam, the entity which, as the 
indwelling Self, exists in the body (atma) by 
making it its habitat (adhikrtya), and which in the 
ultimate analysis is the supreme Brahman. 
Visargah, the offerings, the giving away to gods of 
things like porridge [Caru: An oblations of rice, 
barley and pulse boiled-together to be offered to 
gods.], cake, etc.; bhuta-bhava-udbhava-karah, 
which bring about the origin of the existence of 
things; is karma-sanjnitah, meant by action. This 
sacrifice consisting in pouring of oblations is called 
action. The existence (bhava) of (moving and 
nonmoving) things (bhuta) is bhuta-bhava. The 
coming into being (udbhava) of that (existence) is 
bhuta-bhava-udbhavah. That which causes (karoti) 
this is bhuta-bhava-udbhava-karah, i.e. the 
originator of existing things. It is needed from this 
source that all bengs, moving and non-moving, 
originate thorugh the successive processes of 
railfall etc. (see 3.14-15). 
 
8.4 The which exists in the physical plane is the 
mutable entity, and what exists in the divine plane 
is the Person. O best among the embodied beings, I 
Myself am the entity that exists in the sacrifice in 
this body. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.4 Adhibhutam, that which exists in the physical 
plane, i.e. that which exists by comprising all 
creatures;-what is it?-it consists of the ksarah 
bhavah, mutable entity. Ksarah is that which is 
mutable, which is destructible; bhavah means
anything whatsoever that has orgination. This is 
meaning. Purusah means the Person, derived in 
the sense of he by whom all things are pervaded; 
or, he who lies in every heart. He is 
Hiranyagarbha, who resides in the Sun and 
sustains the organs of all creatures. He is adhi daivatam, the entity existing in the divine plane. 
Deha-bhrtam-vara, O best among the embodied 
beings; adhiyajnah, the entity existing in sacrifices, 
is the Deity, called Visnu, presiding over all 
sacrifices-which agrees with the Vedic text, 
'Sacrifice is indeed Vishu' (Tai, Sam. 1.7.4). Aham 
eva, I Myself, who am that very Visnu; am 
adhiyajnah, the entity existing in the sacrifice; 
which is going on atra dehe, in this body. Since a 
sacrfice is performed with body, therefore it is 
closely associated with the body. In this sense it is 
said to be going on in the body. 
 
8.5 And at the time of death, anyone who departs 
by giving up the body while thinking of Me alone, 
he attains My state. There is no doubt about this. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.5 Ca, and ; anta-kale, at the time of death; yah, 
anyone who; prayati, departs; muktva, by giving 
up; the kalevaram, body; smaran, while thinking; 
mam eva, of Me alone, who am the supreme Lord 
Visnu; sah, he; yati, attains; madhavam, My state, 
the Reality that is Vishu, Asti, there is; na, no; 
samsayah, doubt; atra, about this, in this regard, as 
to whether he attains (Me) or not. 'This rule does 
not apply in relation to me alone.' 'What then?' 
 
8.6 O son of Kunti, thinking of any entity 
whichever it may be one gives up the body at the 
end, he attains that very one, having been always 
engrossed in its thought. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.6 O Son of Kunti, smaran, thinking of; bhavam, 
any entity, any particular deity; yam yam va api, 
which ever it may be; tyajati, one gives up; the 
kalevaram, body; ante, at the end, at the time of the 
departure of life; eti, he attains; tam tam eva, that 
very one, that very entity which is remembered none else; having been sada, always; tadbhava bhavitah, engrossed in its thought. Engrossment in 
it is tad-bhavah; one by whom that is remembered 
as a matter of habitual recollection is tadbhava bhavitah. Since the last thought is thus the cause of 
acquiring the next body  
8.7 Therefore, think of Me at all times and fight. 
There is no doubt that by dedicating your mind 
and intellect to Me, you will attain Me alone. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.7 Tasmat, therefore; anusmara, think of; mam, 
Me, in the way prescribed by the scriptures; 
sarvesu kalesu, at all times; and yudhya, fight, 
engage your-self in war, which is your own (caste) 
duty. Asamsayah, there is no doubt in this matter; 
that arpita-mano-buddhih, by dedicating your 
mind and intellect; mayi; to Me; esyasi, you-you 
who have thus dedicated our mind and intellect to 
Me, Vasudeva-will attain; mam eva, Me alone, as I 
shall be remembered. [When the Lord instructs 
Arjuna to think of Him, and at the same time 
engage in war, it may seem that He envisages a 
combination of Knowledge and action. But this is 
not so, because when one thinks of all actions, 
accessories and results that come within the 
purview of the mind and the intellect as Brahman, 
it is denied that actions etc. have any separate 
reality apart from Brahman. Therefore no 
combination is involved here.] Besides, 
8.8 O son of Prtha, by meditating with a mind 
which is engaged in the yoga of practice and which 
does not stray away to anything else, one reaches 
the supreme Person existing in the effulgent 
region. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.8 Partha, O son of Prtha; anu-cintayan, by 
meditating, i.e. contemplating in accordance with 
(anu) the instruction of teachers and scriptures; 
cestasa, with a mind; abhyasa-yogayuktena, 
engaged in the yoga of practice-abhyasa, practice, 
consists in the repetition of the same kind of 
thought, uninterupted by any contrary idea, with 
regard to Me who am the object of concentration of 
the mind; that practice itself is yoga; the mind of a 
yogi is engrossed (yuktam) in that itself; with a 
mind that is such, and na anya-gamina, which does 
not stray away to anything else which is not 
inclined to go away to any other object; yati, one 
reaches; the paramam, supreme, unsurpassed; 
purusam, Person; divyam, existing in the effulgent 
region (divi), in the Solar Orb. And, to what kind of 
a Person does he go? This is being stated: 
 
8.9 He who meditates on the Omniscient, the 
Anceint, the Ruler, subtler than the subtle, the 
Ordainer of everything, of inconceivable form, 
effulgent like the sun, and beyond darkness-(he 
attains the supreme Person). 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.9 Yah, he who, anyone who; anusmaret, 
meditates on; kavim, the Omniscient, the Knower 
of things past, present and future; puranam, the 
Ancient, the Eternal; anusasitaram, the Ruler, the 
Lord of the whole Universe; aniyamsam, subtler; 
anoh, than the subtle; dhataram, the Ordainer; 
sarvasya, of every-thing-one who grants the fruits 
of actions, in all their varieties, individually to all 
creatures; acintya-rupam, who is of inconceivable 
form-His form, though always existing, defies 
being conceived of by anybody; aditya-varnam, 
who is effulgent like the sun, who is manifest as 
eternal Consciousness like the effulgence of the 
sun; and parastat, beyond; tamasah, darkness beyond the darkness of delusion in the form of 
ignorance-(he attains the supreme Person). This 
verse is to be connected with the earlier itself thus: 
'by meditating (on Him)...he attains Him.' Further, 
 
8.10 At the time of death, having fully fixed the 
Prana (vita force) between the enebrows with an 
unswering mind, and being imbued with devotion 
as also the strength of concentration, he reaches 
that resplendent supreme person. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.10 Prayana-kale, at the time of death; after first 
brining the mind under control in the lotus of the 
heart, and then lifting up the vital force-through 
the nerve going upward-by gradually gaining 
control over (the rudiments of nature such as) 
earth etc. [Space, air, fire, water and earth.] and 
after that, samyak, avesya, having fully fixed; 
pranam, the Prana (vital force); madhye, between; 
the bhruvoh, eye-brows, without losing attention; 
acalena manasa, with an unwavering mind; he, the 
yogi possessed of such wisdom, yuktah, imbued; 
bhaktya, with devotion, deep love; ca eva, as also; 
yoga-balena, [Yoga means spiritual absorption, the 
fixing of the mind on Reality alone, to the exclusion 
of any other object.] with the strength of 
concentration-i.e; imbued with that (strength) also, 
consisting in steadfastness of the mind arising from 
accumulation of impressions resulting from 
spiritual absorption; upaiti, reaches; tam, that; div 
yam, resplendent; param, supreme; purusam, 
Person, described as 'the Omniscient, the Ancient,' 
etc. The Lord again speaks of Brahman which is 
sought to be attained by the process going to be 
stated, and which is described through such 
characteristics as, 'What is declared by the knowers 
of the Vedas,'etc.: 
 
8.11 I shall speak to you briefly of that immutable 
Goal which the knowers of the Vedas declare, into 
which enter the deligent ones free from 
attachment, and aspiring for which people practise 
celibacy. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.11 Pravaksye, I shall speak; te, to you; 
samgrahena, briefly; tat, of that; which is called the 
aksaram, immutable-that whch does not get 
exhausted, which is indestructible; padam, Goal to 
be reached; yat, which; veda-vidah, the knowers of 
the Vedas, the knowers of the purport of the 
Vedas; vedanti, declare, speak of It as opposed to 
all qualifications-'It is neither gross nor minute' (Br.3.8.8) 
etc.-, in accordance with the Upanisadic text, 
'O Gargi, the knowers of Brahman say this 
Immutable (Brahman) is that' (ibid); and further, 
yat, into which, after the attainment of complete 
realization; visanti, enter; yatayah, the diligent 
ones, the monks; who have become vita-ragah, free 
from attachment; and icchantah, aspiring to know 
(-to know being supplied to complete the sense-); 
yat, which Immutable; people caranti, practise; 
brahmacaryam, celibacy-at the teacher's house. 
Commencing with, '"O venerable sir, which world 
does he really win thereby who, among men, 
intently meditates on Om in that wonerful way till 
death?" To him he said, "O Satyakama, this very 
Brahman that is (known as) the inferior and 
superior is but this Om"' (pr.5.1-2), it has been 
stated, 'Again, anyone who meditates on the 
supreme Purusa with the help of this very syllable 
Om, as possessed of three letters,...he is lifted up to 
the world of Brahma (Hiranyagarbha) by the 
Sama-mantras,' (op.cit.5) etc. Again, beginning 
with '(Tell me of that thing which you see as) 
different from virtue, different from vice,' it has 
been stated, 'I tell you briefly of that goal which all 
the Vedas with one voice propound, which all the 
austerities speak of, and wishing for which people 
practise Brahmacarya: it is this, viz Om' (Ka.1.2.14-
15), etc. In the above quotations, Om which is 
going to be spoken of is presented as a name of this 
supreme Brahman, and also as Its symbol like an 
image. This has been done as a means to 
meditation on it (Om) for the attainment of the 
supreme Brahman by poeple of low and mediocre 
intellect, in as much as this leads to Liberation in 
course of time. Here also that very meditation on 
Om in the manner stated above-which is the means 
of attaining the supreme Brahman introduced in, 
'(He who meditates on) the Omniscient, the 
Ancient,' and in, '(I shall speak to you birefly of 
that immutable Goal) which the knowers of the 
Vedas declare,' and which (meditation) leads to 
Liberation in due course [Realization of Brahman 
leads to immediate Liberation (sadyomukti, 
whereas meditation (contemplation, upasana) 
leads to gradual Liberation (krama-mukti).-Tr.]-has 
to be spoken of along with 'adherence to yoga' as 
also whatever is connected directly or indirectly 
with it. For this purpose the following text is 
begun: 
8.12 Having controlled all the passages, having 
confined the mind in the heart, and having fixed 
his own vital force in the head, (and then) 
continuing in the firmness in yoga; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.12 Samyamya, having controlled; sarva-dvarani,
all the passages, the doors of perception; 
niruddhya, having confined; the manah, mind; 
hrdi, in the heart-not allowing it to spread out; and 
after that, with the help of the mind controlled 
therein, rising up through the nerve running 
upward from the heart, adhaya, having fixed; 
atmanah, his own; pranam, vital force; murdhni, in 
the lead; (and then) asthitah, continuing in; 
yogadharanam, the firmness in yoga-in order to 
make it steady-. And while fixing it there itself, 
8.13 He who departs by leaving the body while 
uttering the single syllable, viz Om, which is 
Brahman, and thinking of Me, he attains the 
supreme Goal. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.13 Yah, he who; prayati, departs, dies; tyajan, by 
leaving; deham, the body-the phrase 'leaving the 
body' is meant for qualifying departure; thereby it 
is implied that the soul's departure occurs by 
abandoning the body, and not through the 
destruction of its own reality, having abandoned 
thus-; vyaharan, while uttering; the eka-adsaram, 
single syllable; om iti brahma, viz Om, which is 
Brahman, Om which is the name of Brahman; and 
anusmaran, thinking; mam, of Me, of God who is 
implied by that (syllable); sah, he; yati, attains; the 
paramam, supreme, best; gatim, Goal. Further, 
8.14 O son of Prtha, to that yogi of constant 
concentration and single-minded attention, who 
remembers Me uninterruptedly and for long, I am 
easy of attainment. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.14 Partha, O son of Prtha, tasya yoginah, to that 
yogi; nitya-yuktasya, of constant concentration, 
who is ever absorbed (in God); and ananya-cetah, 
of single-minded attention, a yogi whose mind is 
not drawn to any other object; yah, who; smarati, 
remembers; mam, Me, the supreme God; satatam, 
uninteruptedly; and nityasah, for long-. By 
satatam, uninterrupteldy, is meant 'without any 
break'. By niryasah, is meant along duration. Not 
six months, nor even a year! What then? The 
meaning is: He who remembers Me for his whole 
life, continuously. To that yogi aham, I; am 
sulabhah, easy of attainment. Since this is so, 
therefore one should remain ever absorbed in Me, 
with mind given to nothing else. 'What follows 
from Your being easy of attainment?' This is being 
answered: 'Hear what follows from My being easy 
of attainment.' 
 
8.15 As a result of reaching Me, the exalted ones 
who have attained the highest perfection do not get 
rebirth which is an abode of sorrows and which is 
impermanent. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.15 Upetya mam, as a result of reaching Me who 
am God-as a result of realizing My nature; 
mahatmanah, the exalted ones, the monks; gatah, 
who have attained; the paramam, highest; 
samsiddhim, perfection, called Liberation; na, do 
not; apnuvanti, get; this kind of punarjanama, 
rebirth. As to what kind of rebirth they do not get, 
the Lord states its characteristics-duhkhalayam, 
which is an abode of sorrows, a resort of physical 
and other sorrows, i.e. a birth to which sorrows 
adhere. It is not merely an abode of sorrows, but 
also asavatam, impermanent, having no fixity of 
nature. On the other hand, those who do not reach 
Me, they come again. Again, 'Is it that those who 
attain someone other than You return?' This is 
being answered: 
 
8.16 O Arjuna, all the worlds together with the 
world of Brahma are subject to return. But, O son 
of Kunti, there is no rebirth after reaching Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.16 O Arjuna, all the lokah, worlds; abrahma bhuvanat, together with the world of Brahma bhuvana is that (place) in which creatures are born, 
and brahma-bhuvana means the world of Brahma; 
punah avartinah, are subject to return, are by 
nature liable to come again; Tu, but; kaunteya, O 
son of Kunti, na vidyate, there is no; punarjanma, 
rebirth; upetya, after reaching; mam, Me alone. 
Why are all the worlds together with the realm of 
Brahma subject to return? Becuase they are limited 
by time. How? 
8.17 Those poeple who are knowers of what day 
and night are, know the day of Brahma which ends 
in a thousand yugas [The four yugas (in the human 
worlds), viz Satya, Treta, Dwapara, and Kali are 
made up of 4,320,000 years. This period multiplied 
by a thousand constitutes one day of Brahma. His 
night also extends over an equal period. See M.S. 
and V.S.A.], and His night which ends in a 
thousand yugas. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.17 Viduh, they know; that ahah, day; brahmanah, 
of Brahma, of Prajapati, of Virat; yat, which; 
sahasra-yuga-paryantam, ends in a thousand 
yugas; and also the ratirm, night; yuga-sahasra antam, which ends in a thousand yugas, having the 
same duration as the day. Who knows (these)? In 
reply the Lord says: Te, they; janah, poeple; 
ahoratra-vidah, who are the knowers of what day 
and night are, i.e. the people who know the 
measurement of time. Since the worlds are thus 
delimited by time, therefore they are subject to 
return. What happens during the day and the night 
of Prajapati is being stated: 
8.18 With the coming of day all manifested things 
emerge from the Unmanifest and when night 
comes they merge in that itself which is called the 
Unmanifested. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.18 Ahar-agame, with the coming of day, at the 
time when Brahma wakes; sarvah vyaktayah, all 
manifested things, all things that get manifested, 
all creatures characterized as moving and non moving; prabhavanti, emerge, become manifested; 
avyaktat, from the Unmanifested-avyakta 
(Unmanifested) is the state of sleep of Prajapati; 
from that avyakta. Similarly, ratri-agame, when 
night comes, at the time when Brahma sleeps; 
praliyante, they, all the manifested things, merge; 
tatra eva, in that itself; avyakta-sanjnake, which is 
called the Unmanifested referred to above. In order 
to obviate the defect of the emergence of some 
unmerited result and the destruction of merited 
results; [The following verse says that the very 
same multitude of beings continues in the different 
cycles of creation, and there-fore these two defects 
do not arise.] for pointing out the meaningfulness 
of the scriptures [For the earlier reason the 
scriptures do not lose their validity.] dealing with 
bondage and Liberation; and with a view to 
propounding detachment from the world on the 
ground that the helpless multitude of beings 
perishes after being born again and again under 
the influence of accumulated results of actions that 
have for their origin such evils as ignorance etc. 
[The five evils are: ignorance, egoism, attachment, 
aversion and clinging to life. (See P. Y. Su. 2.3)], the 
Lord says this: 
8.19 O son of Prtha, after being born again and 
again, that very multitude of beings disappears in 
spite of itself at the approach of night. It comes to 
life at the approach of day. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.19 O son of Prtha, bhutva, after being born again 
and again at the approach of day; sah eva, that 
very-not any other; bhutagramah, multitude of 
beings, consisting of the moving and the non-
moving objects that existed in the earlier cycle of 
creation; praliyate, disappears repeatedly; avasah, 
in spinte of itself, [For they are impelled by their 
own defects] without any independence whatever; 
ratri-agame, at the approach of night, at the close 
of the day. Prabhavati, it comes to life, verily in 
spite of itself; ahar-agame, at the approach of day. 
The means for the attainment of that Immutable 
which was introduced has been pointed out in, 'He 
who departs by leaving the body while uttering the 
single syllable, viz Om, which is Brahman, ' etc. 
(13). Now, with a vies to indicating the real nature 
of that very Immutable, this is being said-that It is 
to be reached through this path of yoga: 
8.20 But distinct from that Unmanifested is the 
other eternal unmainfest Reality, who does not get 
destroyed when all beings get destroyed. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.20 He is parah, distinct, different;-From what?-
tasmat, from that aforesaid (Unmanifested). The 
word tu, but, is meant for showing the distinction 
of the Immutable that is going to be spoken of from 
the Unmanifested. He is bhavah, the Reality, the 
supreme Brahman called the Immutable. Even 
though different, there is the possibility of 
similarlity of characteristics. Hence, for obviating 
this the Lord says: anyah, the other, of a different 
characteristic, and He is the Immutable which is 
beyond the range of the organs. It has been said 
that He is distinct from that. From what, again is 
He distinct? Avyaktat, from the Unmaifested 
spoken of earlier, which is the seed of the 
multitude of beings, and which is characterized as 
ignorance (avidya) [Ast. adds, 'anyah vilaksanah, 
bhavah ityabhiprayah: The meaning is that the 
Reality is different and distinct (form that 
Unmanifested).-Tr.] He is sanatnah, eternal. 
Bhavah, the Reality; yah sah, who is such; na, does 
not; vinasyati, get destroyed; when sarvesu 
bhutesu, all beings, beginning from Brahma; 
nasyatsu, get destroyed. 
 
8.21 He who has been mentioned as the 
Unmanifested, the Immutable, they call Him the 
supreme Goal. That is the supreme abode of Mine, 
reaching which they do not return. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.21 He Himself who has been uktah, meantioned; 
as avyaktah, Unmanifest; the aksarah, Immutable; 
ahuh, they call; tam, Him-that very unmanifest 
Reality which is termed as the Immutable; the 
paramam, supreme; gatim, Goal. Tat, That; is the 
paramam, supreme; dhama, abode, i.e. the 
supreme State; mama, of Mine, of Visnu; yam 
prapya, reaching which Reality; na nivartante, they 
do not return to the worldly state. The means for 
gaining That is being stated: 
8.22 O son of Prtha, that supreme Person-in whom 
are included (all) the beings and by whom all this 
is pervaded-is, indeed, reached through one pointed devotion. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.22 O son of Prtha, sah, that; parah purusah, 
supreme, unsurpassable Person-(the word purusa) 
derived in the sense of 'residing in the heart' or 'all pervasiveness'; that Person, compared to whom 
there is nothing superior-; yasya, in whom, in 
which Person; antahsthani, are included; bhutani, 
(all) the beings which are Its products-for a 
product remains inherent in its cause; and yena, by 
whom, by which Person; tatam, is pervaded; 
sarvam, all; idam, this, the Universe, as pot etc. are 
by space; is tu, indeed; labhyah, reached; through 
ananyaya, one-pointed; bhaktya, through devotion, 
characterized as Knowledge; ananyaya, which is 
one pointed, which relates to the Self. The 
Northern Path meant for the attainment of Braman 
by the yogis under discussion, who have 
superimposed the idea of Brahman on the syllable 
Om and who are destined to get Liberation in due 
course, has to be stated. Hence, in order to present 
the intended idea the verse, '(O best of the Bharata 
dynasty) of that time...at which,' etc. is being 
recited. The description of the Path of Return (in 
verse 25) is by way of praising the other Path (of 
Departure, in verse 24): 
 
8.23 O best of the Bharata dynasty, I shall now 
speak of that time by departing at which the yogis 
attain the State of Non-return, and also (of the time 
by departing at which they attain) the State of 
Return. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.23 Bharatarsabha, O best of the Bharata dynasty; 
vaksyami, I shall speak; tu, now; tam, of that; 
kalam, time; prayatah, by departing, by dying; (-
these words are to be which time; yoginah, the 
yogis; yanti, attain; anavrttim, the State of Non return, of nonrebirth; ca eva, and also; of the time 
by departing at which they attain its opposite, 
avrttim, the State of Return. By 'Yogis' are implied 
both the yogis (men of meditation) and the men of 
acitons (rites and duties). But the men of action are 
yogis by courtesy, in accordance with the 
description, 'through the Yoga of Action for the 
yogis' (3.3). The Lord speaks of that time: [This is 
Ast.'s reading.-Tr.] 
8.24 Fire, light, daytime, the birght forrnight, the 
six months of the Northern solstice-by following 
this Path, persons who are knowers of Brahman 
attain Brahman when they die. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.24 Agnih, fire-is a deity presiding over a period 
of time; similarly, jyotih, light-also is a deity 
presiding over a period of time. Or fire and light 
are the well-known Vedic deities. As the 
expression 'mango grove' is used with regard to a 
place where mango trees are more numerous, 
similarly, the expressions 'at which time' and 'that 
time' (in the earlier verse) are used in view of the 
predominance (of the deities presiding over time). 
[If the first two (fire and light) are taken as Vedic 
deities, then the remaining three are the only 
deities of time. Still, the latter being numerically 
greater, all the five deities are referred to as deities 
of time. The deities of both the Paths-of gods and 
manes, or of the Northern and the Southern Paths 
as they are called-who are gods of time, are 
referred to here as 'time' by such words as day, 
fortnight, six months, etc.] So also, ahah, daytime, 
means the deity of daytime. Suklah, the bright 
fortnight, implies the deity presiding over the 
bright fortnight. Sanmasah uttarayanam, the six 
months of the Northern solstice-here, too, is 
understood the deity presiding over the Path. This 
is the principle (of interpretation followed 
elsewhere (in the Upanisads also). Tatra, following 
this Path; janah, persons; who are brahma-vidah, 
knowers of Brahman, those engaged in meditation 
on (the qualified) Brahman; gacchanti, attain; 
brahma, Brahman; prayatah, when they die. It is 
understood that they attain Brahman through 
stages. Indeed, according to the Upanisadic text, 
'His vital forces do not depart' (Br. 4.4.46), there is 
neither going nor coming back for those 
established in full realization, who are fit for 
immediate Liberation. Having their organs merged
in Brahman, they are suffused with Brahman, they 
are verily identified with Brahman. 
 
8.25 Smoke, night, as also the dark fortnight and 
the six months of the Southern solstice-following 
this Path the yogi having reached the lunar light, 
returns. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.25 Dhuman, smoke; and ratrih night, are the 
deities presiding over smoke and night. Similarly, 
krsnah, the dark fornight, means the deity of the 
dark fortnight. Just as before, by sanmasah 
daksinayanam the six months of the Southern 
solstice, also is verily meant a deity. Tatra, 
following this Path; yogi, the yogi who performs 
sacrifices etc., the man of actions; prapya, having 
reached; candramasam jyotih, the lunar light having enjoyed the results (of his actions); 
nivartate, returns, on their exhaustion. 
 
8.26 These two courses of the world, which are 
white and black, are verily considered eternal. By 
the one a man goes to the State of Non-return; by 
the other he returns again. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.26 Ete, these two; gati, courses; jagatah, of the 
world; which are sukla-krsne, white and black [The 
Northern Path (the path of the Gods), and the 
Southern Path (the Path of the Manes) 
respectively.]-white because it is a revealer of 
Knowlege, and black because there is absence of 
that (revelation); are hi, verily; mate, considered; 
sasvate, eternal, because the world is eternal. These 
two courses are possible for those who are 
qualified for Knowledge and for rites and duties; 
not for everybody. This being so, ekaya, by the one, 
by the white one; yati, a man goes; anavrttim, to 
the State of Non-return; anyaya, by the other; 
avartate, he returns; punah, again. 

8.27 O son of Prtha, no yogi (One steadfast in 
meditation.) whosoever has known these two 
courses becomes deluded. Therefore, O Arjuna, be 
you steadfast in yoga at all times. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.27 O son of Prtha, na kascana yogi, no yogi 
whosoever; janan, has known; ete srti, these two 
courses as described-that one leads to worldly life, 
and the other to Liberation; muhyati, becomes 
deluded. Tasmat, therefore; O Arjuna, bhava, be 
you; yoga-yuktah, steadfast in Yoga; sarvesu 
kalesu, at all times. Here about the greatness of 
that yoga: 
 
8.28 Having known this, the yogi transcends all 
those results of rigtheous deeds that are declared 
with regard to the Vedas, sacrifices, austerities and 
also charities, and he reaches the primordial 
supreme State. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
8.28 Viditva, having known; idam, this-having 
fully ascertained and practised what was spoken in 
the course of determining the answers to the seven 
questions (put by Arjuna in verse 1 and 2); the yogi 
atyeti, transcends, goes beyond; tat sarvam, all 
those; punya-phalam, results of righteous deeds, 
aggregate of rewards; yat, that are; pradistam, 
declared by the scriptures; with regard to these,viz 
vedesu, with regard to teh Vedas which have been 
properly [Sitting facing eastward after having 
washed one's hands, face, etc.] studied; yajnesu, 
with regard to sacrifices performed together with 
their accessories; tapahsu, with regard to 
austerities practised correctly [With concentrated 
mind, intellect, etc.]; ca eva, and also; danesu, with 
regard to charities rightly [Taking into 
consideration place, time and fitness of the 
recipient.] given; and upaiti, he reaches; the param, 
supreme; sthanam, State of God; adyam, which is 
primordial, the Cause that existed in the beginning, 
i.e. Brahman. 
 
9.1 The Blessed Lord said -- However, to you who 
are not given to cavilling I shall speak of this 
highest secret itself, which is Knowledge [Jnana 
may mean Brahman that is Consciousness, or Its 
knowledge gathered from the Vedas (paroksa jnana). Vijnana is direct experience (aparoksa jnana).] combined with experience, by realizing 
which you shall be free from evil. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.1 Te, to you; anasuyave, who are not given to 
cavilling, who are free from carping; pravaksyami, 
I shall speak of; idam, this. The Lord uttered the 
word 'this' by bearing in mind as an immediately 
present fact the knowledge of Brahman that will be 
and was spoken of in the earlier chapters. The 
word tu (however) is used for pointing out a 
distinction [The distinction of Knowledge from 
meditation that was being discussed.]. (I shall 
speak) of this itself-what is that?-(it is) 
guhyatamam, the highest secret; and is jnanam, 
Knowledge, complete Knowledge-nothing else-, 
the direct means to Liberation, as stated in the 
Upanisads and the Smrtis, 'Vasudeva is all' (7.19), 
'the Self verily is all this' (Ch. 7.25.2), 'One only, 
without a second' (op. cit. 6.2.1), etc., and also as 
stated in such Upanisadic texts as, 'On the other 
hand, those who understand otherwise than this 
come under a different ruler, and belong to the 
worlds that are subject to decay' (op. cit. 7.25.2). 
(Knowledge) of what kind? It is vijnana-sahitam, 
combined with experience; jnatva, by realizing, by
attaining; yat, which Knowledge; moksyase, you 
shall be free; asubhat, from evil, from worldly 
bondage. 
 
9.2 This is the Sovereign Knowledge, the Sovereign 
Profundity, the best sanctifire; directly realizable, 
righteous, very easy to practise and imperishable. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.2 And that is raja-vidya, the Sovereign 
Knowledge, the kind among sciences because of 
the abundance of its radiance. Indeed, this 
knowledge of Brahman shines most brilliantly 
among all kiinds of learning [The word raja means 
a king, or figuratively, the greatest; or, derived 
from the root raj, to shine, it may mean shining.-
Tr.] So also, idam, this; is raja-guhyam, the 
Sovereign Profundity, the kind among 
profundities; uttamam, the best; pavitram, 
sanctifier. This knowledge of Brahman, which 
sanctifies all things that purify, is the greatest. 
Shine it reduces to ashes in a moment (the results 
of) all actions-righteous, unrighteous and others together with their roots, accumulated over many 
thousands of births, therefore, what to speak of its 
sanctifying power! Besides, it is 
pratyaksavagamam, directly realizable, directly 
perceivable like happiness etc. Even though 
possessed of many qualities, a thing may be 
noticed to be contrary to righteousness. The 
knowledge of the Self is not opposed to 
righteousness, in that way, but it is dharmyam, 
righteous, not divorced from righteousness. Eeve 
so, it may be difficult to practice. Hence the Lord 
says it is susukham, very easy; kartum to practise, 
like the knowledge of the distinction among jewels. 
It is seen (in the world) that, actions which require 
little effort and are accomplished easily yield 
meagre results, whereas those that are difficult to 
accomplish yield great results. Thus the 
contingency arises that this (knowledge of 
Brahman), however. which is easily attained, 
perishes when its result gets exhausted. Therefore 
the Lord says it is avyayam, imperishable. From 
the point of view of its result, it is not perishable 
like (the results of) actions. Hence the knowledge 
of the Self should be highly regarded. 
9.3 O destroyer of foes, persons who are regardless 
of this Dharma (knowledge of the Self) certainly go 
round and round, without reaching Me, along the 
path of transmigration which is fraught with death. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.3 Parantapa, O destroyer of foes; those purusah, 
persons, again; who are asraddadhanah, regardless 
of, devoid of faith in; asya dharmasya, this 
Dharma, this knowledge of the Self-those who are 
faithless as regards its true nature as well as its 
result, who are sinful, who have taken recourse to 
the 'upanisad' (mystical teaching) of demoniacal 
people, consisting in consideration the body alone 
as the Self, and who delight in life (sense 
enjoyments); nivartante, certainly go round and 
round;-where?-mrtyu-samsara-vartmani, along the 
path (vartma) of transmigration (samsara) fraught 
with death (mrtyu), the path leading to hell, birth 
as low creatures, etc., i.e., they go round and round 
along that very path; aprapya, without reaching; 
mam, Me, the supreme God. Certainly there is no 
question of their attaining Me. Hence, the 
implication is that (they go round and round) 
without even acquiring a little devotion, which is 
one of the disciplines [Ast. omits the word 
sadhana, disciplines.-Tr.] constituting the path for 
reaching Me. Having drawn Arjuna's attention 
through the (above) eulogy, the Lord says: 
 
9.4 This whole world is prevaded by Me in My 
unmanifest form. All beings exist in Me, but I am 
not contained in them! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.4 Idam, this; sarvam, whole; jagat, world; is 
tatam, pervaded; maya, by Me; through the 
supreme nature, that I have, avyakta-murtina, in 
My unmanifest form, in that form in which My 
nature is not manifest, i.e. in My form which is 
beyond the range of the organs. Sarva-bhutani, all 
beings, from Brahma to a clump of grass; 
matsthani, exist in Me, are established in Me in that 
unmanifest form. For, no created thing that is 
bereft of the Self (i.e. of Reality) can be conceived of 
as an object of practical use. Therefore, being 
possessed of their reality through Me who am their 
Self, they exist in Me. Hence they are said to be 
established in Me. I Myself am the Self of those 
created things. Consequently, it appears to people 
of little understanding that I dwell in them. Hence 
I say: Na ca aham, but I am not; avasthitah, 
contained; tesu, in them, in the created things. 
Since unlike gross objects I am not in contact with 
anything, therefore I am certainly the inmost core 
even of space. For, a thing that has no contact with 
anything cannot exist like something contained in a 
receptacle. For this very reason that I am not in 
contact with anyting  
9.5 Nor do the beings dwell in Me. Behod My 
divine Yoga! I am the sustainer and originator of 
beings, but My Self is not contained in the beings. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.5 Na ca bhutani, nor do the beings, beginning 
from Brahma; matsthani, dwell in Me. Pasya, 
behold; me, My; aisvaram, divine; yogam, Yoga, 
action, performance, i.e. this real nature of Myself. 
The Upanisadic text, too, similarly shows the 
absence of association (of the Self) due to Its being 
free from contact: '...unattached, for It is never 
attached' (Br. 3.9.26). Behold this other wonder: I 
am the bhuta-bhrt, sustainer of beings, though I am 
unattached. Ca, but; mama atma, My Self; na 
bhutasthah, is not contained in the bengs. As it has 
been explained according to the logic stated above, 
there is no possibility of Its remaining contained in 
beings. How, again, is it said, 'It is My Self? 
Following human understanding, having 
separated the aggregate of body etc. (from the Self)
and superimposing eoism of them, the Lord calls It 
'My Self'. But not that He has said so by ignorantly 
thinking like ordinary mortals that the Self is 
different from Himself. So also, I am the bhuta bhavanah, originator of beings, one who gives 
birth to or nourishes the beings. By way of 
establishing with the help of an illustration the 
subject-matter [Subject-matter-that the Self, which 
has no contact with anything, is the substratum of 
creation, continuance and dissolution.] dealt with 
in the aforesaid two verses, the Lord says: 
 
9.6 Understand thus that just as the voluminous 
wind moving everywhere is ever present in space, 
similarly all beings abide in Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.6 Upadharaya, understand; iti, thus; that yatha, 
just as; in the world, the mahan, voluminous-in 
dimension; vayuh, wind; sarvatragah, moving 
everywhere; is nityam, ever; [During creation, 
continuance and dissolution] akasa-sthitah, present 
in space; tatha, similarly; (sarvani, all; bhutani, 
beings; matsthani,) abide in Me who am 
omnipresent like space-abide certainly without any 
contact. 
 
9.7 O son Kunti, all the beings go back at the end of 
a cycle to My Prakrti. I project them forth again at 
the beginning of a cycle. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.7 Kaunteya, O son of Kunti; sarva-bhutani, all the 
beings-all the beings which, like wind abiding in 
space, abide thus in Me during their period of 
existence; yanti, go back; kalpa-ksaye, at the end of 
a cycle, at the time of dissolution; mamikam 
prakrtim, to My Prakrti which consists of the three 
gunas (qualities; see 7.13) and is (called My) lower 
Nature. Punah, again; aham, I; visrjami, project 
forth, create; tani, them, the beings, as before [As 
before: as in previous cycles of creation.]; 
kalpadau, at the beginning of a cycle, at the time of 
creation. 
 
9.8 Keeping My own prakrti under control, I 
project forth again and again the whole of this 
multitude of beings which are powerless owing to 
the influence of (their own) nature. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.8 Thus avastabhya, keeping under control; svam, 
My own; prakrtim, Prakrti, which is charcterized 
as nescience; visrjami, I project forth; punah, 
punah, again and again; the krtsnam, whole of; 
imam, this; existing bhuta-gramam, multitude of 
beings which are born of Prakrti; which, being 
under another's sub-jugation due to such defects 
[See under 8.19, introductory Commentary.-Tr.] as 
ignorance etc., are avasam, powerless, not 
independent; prakrteh vasat, under the influence 
of their own nature. 'In that case, You, who are the 
supreme God and who ordain this multitude of 
beings unequally, will become associated with 
virtue and vice as a result of that act?' In aswer the 
Lord says this" 
 
9.9 O Dhananjaya (Arjuna), nor do those actions 
bind Me, remaining (as I do) like one unconcerned 
with, and unattached to, those actions. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.9 O Dhananjaya, na ca, nor do; tani, those; 
karmani, actions-which are the sources of the 
creation of the multitude of beings unequally; 
nibadhnanti, bind; mam, Me, who am God. As to 
that, the Lord states the reason for His not 
becoming associated with the actions: Asinam, 
remaining (as I do); udasinavat, like one 
unconcerned, like some indifferent spectator- for 
the Self is not subject to any change; and asaktam, 
unattached; tesu karmasu, to those actions-free 
from attachment to results, free from the egoism 
that 'I do.' Hence, even int he case of any other 
person also, the absence of the idea of agentship 
and the absence of attachment to results are the 
causes of not getting bound. Otherwise, like the 
silkworm, a foolish man becomes bound by 
acitons. This is the idea. There (in th previous two 
verses) it involves a contradiction to say, 
'Remaining like one unconcerned, I project forth 
this multitude of beings.' In order to dispel this 
doubt the Lord says: 
 
9.10 Under Me as the supervisor, the Prakrti 
produces (the world) of the moving and the non moving things. Owing to this reason, O son of 
Kunti, the world revolves. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.10 Maya, under Me; adhyaksena, as the 
supervisor, remaining changeless as a mere 
witness under all circumstances; prakrtih, the 
Prakrti, My maya consisting of the three gunas and 
characterized as ignorance; suyate, produces; the 
world sa-cara-acaram. of the moving and the none moving things. Thus there is the Vedic text, 'The 
one divine Being is hidden in all beings; He is 
amnipresent, the indwelling Self of all bengs, the 
Supervisor of actions, the refuge of all beings, the 
witness, the one who imparts consceiousness, 
unconditioned [This is according to Sankaracarya's 
commentary on this verse. A.G. interprets kevala 
as non-dual.-Tr.] and without qualities' (Sv. 6.11). 
Anena hetuna, owing to this reason-because of this 
presiding over; O son of Kunti, the jagat, world, 
with the moving and the non-moving things, 
consisting of the manifest and the unmanifest; 
viparivartate, revolves, under all conditions 
[During creation, continuance and dissolution.] All 
the activities of the world in the form, 'I eat this; I 
see; I hear this; I experience this happiness, suffer 
this sorrow; I shall do this for that purpose, [Ast. 
omits this portion.-Tr] I shall do this for this 
purpose; I shall know this,' etc. indeed arise owing 
to their being the objects of the conscious witness. 
They verily exist in consciousness, and end in 
consciousness. And such mantras as, 'He who is 
the witness of this is in the supreme heaven' 
[Supreme heaven, the heart; i.e. He is inscrutable.] 
(Rg., Na. Su. 10.129.7; Tai. Br.2.8.9), reveal this fact. 
Since it follows from this that there is no other 
conscious being part from the one Deity-who is the 
witness of all as the absolute Consciousness, and 
who in reality has no contact with any kind of 
enjoyment-, therefore there is no other enjoyer. 
Hence, in this context, the question, 'For what 
purpose is this creation?', and its answer are 
baseless-in accordance with the Vedic text, 'Who 
know (It) truly, who can fully speak about this 
here? From where has this come? From where is 
this variegated creation?' (Rg. 3.54.5; 10.129.6). And 
it has been pointed out by the Lord also: 
'Knowledge remains covered by ignorance. 
Thereby the creatures become deluded' (5.15). 
 
9.11 Not knowing My supreme nature as the Lord 
of all beings, foolish people disregard Me who 
have taken a human body. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.11 Ajanatah, not knowing; mama, My; param, 
supreme; bhavam, nature-My supreme Reality, 
which is like space, nay, which is subtler and more 
pervasive than space; as bhuta-maheswaram, the 
Lord of all beings, the great Lord of all beings who 
is their Self; mudhah, foolish people, the non discriminating ones; avajananti, disregard, belittle; 
mam, Me, although I am by nature thus eternal, 
pure, intelligent, free and the Self of all beings; and 
asritam, who have taken; manusim tanum, a 
human body common to men, i.e... when I act with 
the help of a human body. As a result of that, as a 
result of continously disrespecting Me, those 
wretches get ruined. How? 
 
9.12 Of vain hopes, of vain actions, of vain 
knowledge, and senseless, they become verily 
possessed of the deceptive disposition of fiends 
and demons. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.12 Moghasah, of vain hopes. So also, mogha karmanah, of vain actions: their rites, such as 
Agnihotra etc. which are undertaken by them, 
verily become vain, fruitless actions, because of 
dishonouring the Lord, disregarding Him who is 
their own Self. In this way they are of vain actions. 
Similarly, mogha-jnanah, of vain knowledge: of 
fruitless knowledge; even their knowledge verily 
becomes useless. And vicetasah, senseless: i.e., they 
lose their power of discrimination. Besides, 
[Besides, in the next birth...] they become sritah, 
possessed of; the mohinim, self-deceptive, self delusive; prakritim, disposition; raksasim, of 
fiends; and asurim, of demons-according to which 
the body is the Self; i.e., they become habitually 
inclined to act cruelly, saying, 'cut, break, drink, 
eat, steal others' wealth,' etc. [The habit to cut, 
break, drink, eat, etc. is characteristic of fiends. The 
habit of stealing others' wealth, etc. is characteristic 
of demons.] This is stated in the Sruti, 'Those 
worlds of devils (are covered by blinding 
darkness)' (Is. 3). 
 
9.13 O son of Prtha, the noble ones, being 
possessed of divine nature, surely adore Me with 
single-mindedness, knowing Me as the immutable 
source of all objects. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.13 On the other hand, O son of Prtha, those 
mahat-manah, noble ones-who are not small mined, who are imbued with faith, and who have 
set out on the path of Liberation, which is 
characerized by devotion to God; being asritah, 
possessed of; daivim, divine; prakrtim, nature distinguished by mental and physical control, 
kindness, faith, etc.; tu, surely; bhajante, adore; 
mam, Me, God; ananya-manasah, with single mindedness; jnatva, knowing Me; as the avyayam, 
immutable; bhutadim, source of all objects, of 
space etc. (i.e. th five elements) as well as of living 
beings. How? 
 
9.14 Always glorifying Me and striving, the men of 
firm vows worship Me by paying obeisance to Me 
and being ever endowed with devotion. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.14 Satatam, always; kirtayantah, glorifying; mam, 
Me, God, who am Brahman in reaility; ca, and; 
yatantah, striving, endeavouring with the help of 
such virtues as withdrawal of the organs, control of 
mind and body, kindness, non-injury, etc.; drdha vratah, the men of firm vows those whose vows 
[Vows such as celibacy], those whosevows are 
unshakable; upasate, worship Me; namasyantah, 
by paying obeisance; mam, to Me, to the Self 
residing in the heart, ca, and; nitya-yuktah, being 
ever endowed; bhaktya, with devotion. The 
various ways in which they adore are being stated: 
 
9.15 Others verily worship Me by adoring 
exclusively through the sacrifice of the knowledge 
of oneness; (others worship Me) multifariously, 
and (others) as the multiformed existing variously. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.15 Anye, others, giving up others forms of 
adoration; ca, verily; upasate, worship; mam, Me, 
God; yajantah, by adoring, glorifying; api, 
exclusively; jnana-yajnene ekatvena, through the 
sacrifice of the knowledge of oneness-knowledge 
of God itself being the sacrifice; and that 
knowledge consists in the realization of the highest 
truth that the supreme Brahman is verily one. 
Adoring with that (knowledge) they worship Me.
And some others Me prthaktvena, multifariously in different forms as the sun, moon, etc. They 
worship (Me) by thinking that, Visnu who is God 
Himself exists in different forms as the sun etc. Still 
others worship Me thinking that, that very God 
who is visvatomukhah, mulitiformed, who has His 
facr everywhere, i.e., who is the Cosmic Person; 
exists bahudha, variously. In numerous ways they 
worship Him, the Cosmic Person, who has His face 
everywhere. 'If they worship in numerous ways, 
how is it that they worship You alone?' Hence the 
Lord says: 
 
9.16 I am the kratu, I am the yajna, I am the svadha, 
I am the ausadha, I am the mantra, I Myself am the 
ajya, I am the fire, and I am the act of offering. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.16 Aham, I; am the kratuh, a kind of Vedic 
sacrifice; I Myself am the yajnah, sacrifice as 
prescribed by the Smrtis; further, I am svadha, the 
food that is offered to the manes; I am ausadham by which word is meant the food that is eaten by 
all creatures. Or, svadha means food in general of 
all creatures, and ausadha means medicine for 
curing diseases. I am the mantra with which 
offering is made to manes and gods. I Myself am 
the ajyam, oblations; and I am agnih, the fire-I 
Myself am the fire into which the oblation is 
poured. And I am the hutam, act of offering. 
Besides, 
 
9.17 Of this world I am the father, mother, 
ordainer, (and the), grand-father; I am the 
knowable, the sancitifier, the syllable Om as also 
Rk, Sama and Yajus. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.17 Asya, of this; jagatah, world; aham, I; am pita, 
the father; mata, the mother; dhata, ordainer, 
dispenser of the results of their actions to the 
creatures; (and the) pirtamahah, grand-father. I am 
the vedayam, knowable-that which has to be 
known; the pavitram, sanctifier; [Virtuous actions.] 
and the onkarah, syllable Om; eva ca, as also Rk, 
Sama and Yajus. [Brahman, which has to be 
known, is realizable through Om, regarding which 
fact the three Vedas are the authority. The ca (as 
also) is suggestive of the Atharva-veda.] Moreover, 

9.18 (I am) the fruit of actions, the nourisher, the 
Lord, witness, abode, refuge, friend, origin, end, 
foundation, store and the imperishable seed. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.18 (I am) the gatih, fruit of actions; the bharta, 
nourisher; [The giver of the fruits of actions.] the 
prabhuh, Lord; the saksi, witness of all tha is done 
or not done by creatures; the nivasah, abode, 
where creatures live; the saranam, refuge, remover 
of sufferings of the afflicted who take shelter; the 
suhrt, friend, one who does a good turn without 
thought of reward; the prabhavah, origin of the 
world; the pralayah, end, the place into which the 
world merges. So also, (I am) the sthanam, 
foundation on which the world rests; the 
nidhanam, store, which is for future enjoyment of 
creatures; and the avyayam, imperishable; bijam, 
seed, the cause of growth of all things which 
germinate. The seed is imperishable because it 
continues so long as the world lasts. Indeed, 
nothing springs up without a seed. And since 
creation is noticed to be continuous, it is 
understood that the continuity of the seed never 
ends. Further, 
 
9.19 O Arjuna, I give heat, I withhold and pour 
down rain. I am verily the nectar, and also death 
existence and nonexistence. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.19 O Arjuna, aham, I, in the form of the sun; 
tapami, give heat through some intense rays. 
Through some rays utsrjami, I pour down; varsam, 
rain. Having poured down, again nigrhnami, I 
withdraw it through some rays-for eight months. 
Again I pour it down in the rainy season. I am eva 
ca, verily; the amrtam, nectar of the gods; and 
mrtyuh, death of the mortals. I Myself am sat, 
existence-the effect which has come into bneing in 
relation to its cause; and its opposite, asat, 
nonexistence. [Nonexistence: the cause which has 
not become manifest as the effect possessing name 
and form, It cannot be admitted that the effect has 
absolute existence, for the Upanisad says, 'All 
transformation has speech as it basis, and it is 
name only' (Ch.6. 1. 4). Nor can it be said that the 
cause has absolute non-existence, for there is the 
text,'...by what logic can the existent come verily 
out of nonexistence? But surely,...all this was 
Existence, one without a second' (op. cit. 6.2.2).] It 
is not that the Lord is Himself absolutely 
nonexistence; nor are effect and cause (absolutely) 
existence and nonexistent (respectively). Those 
men of Knowledge who meditate of Me while 
worshpping Me according to the respective forms 
of sacrifices mentioned above-regardomg Me as 
one or multifirious, etc.-, they attain Me alone 
according to their conceptions. 
9.20 Those who are versed in the Vedas, who are 
drinkers of Soma and are purified of sin, pray for 
the heavenly goal by worshipping Me through 
sacrifices. Having reached the place (world) of the 
king of gods, which is the result of righteousness, 
they enjoy in heaven th divine pleasure of gods. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.20 Those, again, who are ignorant and desirous of 
pleasures, trai-vidyah, who are versed in the three 
Vedas, who know the Rk, Yajus and Sama Vedas; 
somapah, who are drinkers of Soma; and who, as a 
result of that very drinking of Soma, are puta papah, purified of sin; prarthayante, pray for; the 
svargatim, heavenly goal, the attainment of 
heaven-heaven itself being the goal [Ast. adds this 
portion-svareva gatih, heaven itself being the goal.-
Tr.]-; istva, by worshipping; mam, Me, existing in 
the forms of gods such as the Vasus and others; 
yajnaih, through sacrifices such as the Agnistoma 
etc. And asadya, having reached; surendra-lokam, 
the place (world) of the kind of gods, of Indra; 
(which is) punyam, the result of righteousness; te, 
they; asnanti, enjoy; divi, in heaven; the devyan, 
divine, heavenly, supernatural;; deva-bhogan, 
pleasures of gods. 
 
9.21 After having enjoyed that vast heavenly 
world, they enter into the human world on the 
exhaustion of their merit. Thus, those who follow 
the rites and duties prescribed in the three Vedas, 
and are desirous of pleasures, attain the state of 
going and returning. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.21 Bhuktva, after having enjoyed; tam, that: 
visalam, vast; svargalokam, heavenly world; te, 
they; visanti, enter into; this martyalokam, human 
world; ksine, on the exhaustion; of their punye, 
merit. Evam, thus, indeed; anuprapannah, those 
who follow in the manner described; trai dharmyam, [A variant reading is trayi-dharmam.-
Tr.] the rites and duties prescribed in the three 
Vedas-merely the Vedic rites and duties; and are 
kama-kamah, desirous of pleasures; labhante, 
attain; only gata-agatam, the state of going and 
returning, but never that of independence. This is 
the meaning. 
9.22 Those persons who, becoming non-different 
from Me and meditative, worship Me everywhere, 
for them, who are ever attached (to Me), I arrange 
for securing what they lack and preserving what 
they have. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.22 On the other hand, ye janah, those persons, the 
monks, who are desireless and fully illumined; 
who ananyah, becoming non-different (from Me), 
having realized the supreme Deity, Narayana, as 
their own Self; and cintayantah, becoming 
meditative; ['Having known that I, Vasudeva, am 
the Self of all, and there is nothing else besides 
Me'.] paryu-pasate mam, worship Me everywhere; 
['They see Me the one, all-pervading, infinite 
Reality.'] tesam, for them; who have realized the 
supreme Truth, nitya-abhiyuktanam, who are ever 
attached (to Me); aham, I; vahami, arrange for; 
both yoga-kesamam, securing what they lack and 
preserving what they have. Yoga means making 
available what one does not have, and ksema 
means the protection of what one has got. Since 
'but the man of Knowledge is the very Self. (This 
is) My opinion' and 'he too is dear to Me' (7.17,18), 
therefore they have become My own Self as also 
dear. Does not the Lord surely arrange for securing 
what they lack and protecting what they have even 
in the case of other devotees? This is true. He does 
arrange for it. But the difference lies in this: Others 
who are devotees make their own efforts as well 
for their own sake, to arrange for securing what 
they lack and protecting what they have. On the 
contrary, those who have realized non-duality do 
not make any effrot to arrange for themselves the 
acquisition of what they do not have and the 
preservation of what they have. Indeed, they desire 
nothing for themselves, in life or in death. They 
have taken refuge only in the Lord. Therefore the 
Lord Himself arranges to procure what they do not 
have and protect what they have got. 'If you 
Yourself are the other gods even, then do not their 
devotees too worship You alone?' 'Quite so!' 
9.23 Even those who, being devoted to other deities 
and endowed with faith, worship (them), they also, 
O son of Kunti, worship Me alone (though) 
following the wrong method. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.23 Api, even; ye, those who; anya-devata bhaktah, being devoted to tother deities; and 
anvitah sraddhaya, endowed with faith; yajante, 
worship (them), te api, they also; O son of Kunti, 
yajanti, worship; mam, Me; eva, alone; (though) 
avidhi-purvakam, following the wrong method. 
Avidhi implies ignorance. So the idea is that they 
worship (Me) ignorantly. 'How it is that they 
worship (Me) ignorantly?' [i.e. the worshippers of 
other deities worship them knowingly, and hence, 
how can the question of their ignorance arise?] 
This is being answered: Because  
9.24 I indeed am the enjoyer as also the Lord of all 
sacrifices; but they do not know Me in reality. 
Therefore they fall. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.24 As the Self of the deities (of the sacrifices), 
aham, I; hi, indeed; am the bhokta, enjoyer; ca eva, 
as also; the prabhuh, Lord; [The Lord: 'I being the 
indwelling Ruler of all.'] sarva-yajnanam, of all 
sacrifices enjoined by the Vedas and the Smrtis. A 
sacrifice is verily presided over by Me, for it has 
been said earlier, 'I Myself am the entity (called 
Visnu) that exists in the sacrifice in this body' (8.4). 
Tu, but; na abhi-jananti, they do not know; mam, 
Me as such; tattvena, in reality. And atah, 
therefore, by worshipping ignorantly; te, they; 
cyavanti, fall from the result of the sacrifice. 
['Although they perform sacrifices with great 
diligence, still just because they do not know Me 
real nature and do not offer the fruits of their 
sacrifices to Me, they proceed to the worlds of the 
respective deities through the Southern Path 
(beginning with smoke; see 8.25). Then, after the 
exhaustion of the results of those sacrifices and the 
falling of the respective bodies (assumed in those 
worlds) they return to the human world for 
rembodiment.'-M.S. (See also 9.20-1.)] The result of 
a sacrifice is inevitable even for those who worship 
ignorantly out of their devotion to other deities. 
How? 
 
9.25 Votaries of the gods reach the gods; the 
votarites of the manes go to the manes; the 
worshippers of the Beings reach the Beings; and 
those who worship Me reach Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.25 Deva-vratah, votaries of the gods, those whose 
religious observances [Making offerings and 
presents, circumambulation, bowing down, etc.] 
and devotion are directed to the gods; yanti, reach, 
go to; devan, the gods. Pitr-vratah, the votaries of 
the manes, those who are occupied with such rites 
as obsequies etc., who are devoted to the manes; go 
pitrn, to the manes such as Agnisvatta and others. 
Bhutejyah, the Beings such as Vinayaka, the group 
of Sixteen (divine) Mothers, the Four Sisters, and 
others. And madyajinah, those who worship Me, 
those who are given to worshipping Me, the 
devotees of Visnu; reach mam, Me alone. Although 
the effort (involved) is the same, still owing to 
ingorance they do not worship Me exclusively.
Thereby they attain lesser results. This is the 
meaning. 'Not only do My devotees get the 
everlasting result in the form of non-return (to this 
world), but My worship also is easy.' How? 
 
9.26 Whoever offers Me with devotion-a leaf, a 
flower, a fruit, or water, I accept that (gift) of the 
pure-hearted man which has been devotionally 
presented. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.26 Yah, whoever; prayaccati, offers; me, Me; 
bhaktya, with devotion; patram, a leaf; puspam, a 
flower phalam, a fruit; or toyam, water; asnami, I 
accept; tat, that (gift)-leaf etc.; prayata-atmanah, of 
the pure-hearted man; which has been bhakti upahrtam devotionally presented. Since this is so, 
therefore  
9.27 O son of Kunti, whatever you do, whatever 
you eat, whatever you offer as a sacrifice, whatever 
you give and whatever austerities you undertake, 
(all) that you offer to Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.27 O son of Kunti, yat-karosi, whatever you do, 
what comes spontaneously; [Actions such as 
walking etc. that are spontaneous,not injunctions 
of the scriptures.] yad-asnasi, whatever you eat; 
and yat-juhosi, whatever you offer as a sacrifice, 
whatever sacrifices you perform-be it prescribed 
by the Vedas or by the Smrtis; yatadadasi, 
whatever you give-gold, food, clarified butter, etc. 
to Brahmanas and others; and yat-tapasyasi, 
whatever austerties you undertake; (all) tat, that; 
kurusva madarpanam, you offer to Me. 'Hear what 
happens to you when you act thus.' 
 
9.28 Thus, you will become free from bondage in 
the form of actions which are productive of good 
and bad results. Havng your mind inbued with the 
yoga of renunciation and becoming free, you will 
attain Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.28 By dedicating to Me evam, thus; maksyase, 
you will become free; karma-bandhanaih, from 
bondage in the form of actions-actions themselves 
being the bonds; subha-asubha-phalaih, which are 
productive of good and bad results-i.e. from 
actions that have desirable (subha) and 
undesireable (asubha) results (phala). Sannyasa, 
renunciation, is that which results from dedication 
(of actions) to Me, and that is also yoga since it 
involves actions. He who has his mind (atma) 
endowed (yukta) with that yoga of renunciation 
(sannyasa-yoga) is sannyasa-yoga-yukta-atma. 
You, being such, having your mind endowed with 
the yoga of renunciation, and vimuktah, becoming 
free from the bonds of actions evern while living; 
upaisyasi, will attain, come; mam, to Me, when this 
body falls. In that case the Lord is possessed of 
love and hatred inasmuch as He favours the 
devotees, and not others? That is not so: 
9.29 I am impartial towards all beings; to Me there 
is none detastable or none dear. But those who 
worship Me with devotion, they exist in Me, and I 
too exist in them. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.29 Aham, I; am samah, impartial, equal; sarva bhutesu, towards all beings; me, to Me; na asti, 
there is none; dvesyah, detestable; na, none; 
priyah, dear. I am like fire: As fire does not ward 
off cold from those who are afar, but removes it 
from those who apporach, near, similarly I favour 
the devotees, not others. Tu, but; ye, those who 
approach near, similarly I favour the devotees, not 
others. Tu, but; ye, those who; bhajanti, worship 
Me, God; bhaktya, with devotion; te they; exist 
mayi, in Me-by their very nature; ['Their mind 
becomes fit for My manifestation, as it has been 
purified by following the virtuous path.'] they do 
not exist in Me because of My love, Ca, and; aham, 
I; api, too; naturally exist tesu, in them, not in 
others. Thus there is no hatred towards them (the 
latter). 'Listen to the greatness of devotion to Me:' 
9.30 Even if a man of very bad conduct worships 
Me with one-pointed devotion, he is to be 
considered verily good; for he has resolved rightly. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.30 Api cet, even if; su-duracarah, a man of very 
bad conduct, of extremely vile behaviour, of very 
condemnable character; bhajate, worships; mam, 
Me; ananyabhak, with one-pointed devotion, with 
his mind not given to anybody else; he; 
mantavyah, is to be considered, deemed; eva, 
verily; sadhuh, good, as well behaved; hi, for; sah, 
he; samyakvyavasitah, has resolved rightly, has 
virtuous intentions. 
 
9.31 He soon becomes possessed of a virtuous 
mind; he attains everlasting peace. Do you proclain 
boldly, O son of Kunti, that My devotee does not 
get ruined. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.31 Having given up his external evil behaviour 
due to the strength of his internal proper resolves, 
ksipram bhavati, he soon becomes; verily dharma atma, possessed of a virtuous mind; and 
nigaccahti, he attains; sasvat, everlasting; santim, 
peace, quietude [Cessation of evil acts.]. O son of 
Kunti, listen to the supreme Truth: Pratijanihi, do 
you proclaim boldly, make a firm declaration; that 
me, My; bhaktah, devotee, who has dedicated his 
inner being to Me; na, does not; pranasyati, get 
ruined. Moreover, 
 
9.32 For, O son of Prtha, even those who are born 
of sin-women, Vaisyas, as also Sudras [S.'s 
construction of this portion is: women, Vaisyas as 
also Sudras, and even others who are born of sin 
(i.e., those who are born low and are of vile deeds, 
viz Mlecchas, Pukkasas and others). M.S. also takes 
papa-yonayah (born of sin) as a separate phrase, 
and classifies women and others only as those 
debarred from Vedic study, etc.-Tr.]-, even they 
reach the highest Goal by taking shelter under Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.32 Hi, for; O son of Prtha, ye api, even those; 
papayonayah syuh, who are born of sin;-as to who 
they are, the Lord says-striyah, women; vaisyah, 
Vaisyas, tatha, as also; sudrah, Sudras; te api, even 
they; yanti, reach, go to; the param, highest; gatim, 
Goal vyapasritya, by taking shelter; mam, under 
Me-by accepting Me as their refuge. 
 
9.33 What to speak of the holy Brahmanas as also 
of devout kind-sages! Having come to this 
ephemeral and miserable world, do you worship 
Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.33 Kim punah, what to speak of; the punyah 
brahmanah, holy Bramanas, of sacred birth; tatha, 
as also; of the bhaktah, devout; rajarsayah, kind sages-those who are kings and, at the same time, 
sages! Since this is so, therefore, prapya, having 
come; imam, to this; anityam, ephemeral, ever 
changeful; and asukham, miserable, unhappy; 
lokam, world, the human world-having attained 
this human life which is a means to Liberation; 
bhajasva, do you worship, devoted yourself; mam 
to Me. How? 
9.34 Having your mind fixed on Me, be devoted to 
Me, sacrifice to Me, and bow down to Me. By 
concentrating your mind and accepting Me as the 
supreme Goal, you shall surely attain Me who am 
thus the Self. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
9.34 Manmana bhava, have your mind fixed on 
Me; [Here Ast. adds the word vasudeva.-Tr] and 
also be madbhakah, devoted to Me. Madyaji, 
sacrifice to Me, be engaged in sacrificing to Me. 
And namaskuru, bow down; only mam, to Me. 
Yuktva, by concentrating your mind; and mat parayanah, by accepting Me as the supreme Goal; 
esyasi eva, you shall surely attain; mam, Me who 
am God. You shall attain Me evam atmanam, who 
am thus the Self: I indeed am the Self of all the 
beings, and am also the supreme Goal. You shall 
attain Me who am such. In this way, the word 
atmanam (Self) is to be connected with the 
preceding word mam (Me). This is the purport. 
10.1 The Blessed Lord said -- O mighty-armed one, 
listen over again ot My supreme utterance, which I, 
wishing your welfare, shall speak to you who take 
delight (in it). 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.1 O mighty-armed one, srnu, listen; bhuyah eva, 
over agiain; me, to My; paramam, supreme; vacah, 
utterance, which is expressive of the transcendental 
Reality; yat, which supreme Truth; aham, I; 
vaksyami, shall speak; te, to you; priyamanaya, 
who take delight (in it). You become greatly 
pleased by My utterance, like one drinking 
ambrosia. Hence, I shall speak to you hita kamyaya, wishing your welfare. 'Why shall I 
speak?' In answer to this the Lord says: 
10.2 Neither the gods nor the great sages know My 
majesty. For, in all respects, I am the source of the 
gods and the great sages. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.2 Na sura-sanah, neither the gods-Brahma and 
others; viduh, know;-what do they not know?-me, 
My; prabhavam (prabhavam), majesty, abundance 
of lordly power-or, derived in the sense of 'coming 
into being', it means origin. Nor even the 
maharsayah, great sages, Bhrgu and others [Bhrgu, 
Marici, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasistha.-
Tr.] devanam, of the gods; ca, and; maharsinam, of 
the great sages. Besides, 
10.3 He who knows Me-the birthless, the 
beginningless, and the great Lord of the worlds, he, 
the undeluded one among mortals, becomes freed 
from all sins. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.3 Yah, he who; vetti, knows; mam, Me; ajam, the 
birthless; and anadim, the beginningless: Since I 
am the source of the gods and the great sages, and 
nothing else exists as My origin, therefore I am 
birthless and beginningless. Being without an 
origin is the cause of being birthless. He who 
knows Me who am thus birthless and 
beginningless, and loka-maheswaram, the great 
Lord of the worlds, the transcendental One devoid 
of ignorance and its effects; sah, he; the 
asammudhah, undeluded one; martyesu, among 
mortals, among human beings; pramucyate, 
becomes freed; sarva-papaih, from all sins committed knowingly or unknowingly. 'For the 
following reason also I am the great Lord of the 
worlds:' 
10.4 Intelligence, wisdom, non-delusion, 
forgiveness, truth, control of the external organs, 
control of the internal organs, happiness, sorrow, 
birth, death and fear as also fearlessness; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.4 See Commentary under 10.5. 
10.5 Non-injury, equanimity, satisfaction, austerity, 
charity, fame, infamy-(these) different dispositions 
of beings spring from Me alone. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.5 Buddhih, intelligence-the power of the internal 
organ to know of things which are subtle etc. 
Indeed, people talk of a man possessed of this 
(power) as intelligent. Jnanam, wisdom-knowledge 
of entities such as the Self etc. Asammohah, non delusion-proceeding with discrimination with 
regard to things that are to be known as they 
present them-selves. Ksama, forgiveness unperturbability of the mind of one who is abused 
or assulted. Satyam, truth-an utterance regarding 
what one has seen, heard, and felt oneself, 
communicated as such to others for their 
understanding, is said to be truth. Damah, control 
of the external organs. Samah, control of the 
internal organs. Sukham, happiness. Duhkham, 
sorrow. Bhavah, birth; and its opposite abhavah, 
death. And bhayam, fear; as also its opposite 
abhayam, fearlessness. Ahimsa, non-injury-non cruely towards creatures. Samata, equanimity. 
Tustih, satisfaction-the idea of sufficiency with 
regard to things acquired. Tapah, austerity disciplining the body through control of the 
organs. Danam, charity-distribution (of wealth) 
according to one's capacity. Yasah, fame-renown 
arising from righteousness. On the contrary, 
ayasah is infamy due to unrighteousness. (These) 
prthak-vidhah, different; bhavah, dispositions intelligence etc. as described; bhuanam, of beings, 
of living bengs. bhavanti, spring; mattah, eva, from 
Me alone, [This is said in the sesne that none of 
these dispositions can exist without the Self.] from 
God, in accordanced with their actions. Moreover, 
10.6 The seven great sages as also the four Manus 
of anceint days, of whom are these creatures in the 
world, had their thoughts fixed on Me, and they 
were born from My mind. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.6 Sapta, the seven; maharsayah, great sages Bhrgu and others; tatha, as also; catvarah, the four; 
manavah, Manus [Savarni, Dharma-savarini, 
Daksa-savarni, and Savarna.-Tr.]- well known as 
Savarnas; purve, of ancient days; yesam, of whom, 
of which Manus and the great sages; imah, these; 
prajah, creatures, moving and non-moving; loke in 
the world, are the creation; madbhavah, had their 
thoughts fixed on Me-they had their minds fixed 
on Me, (and hence) they were endowed with the 
power of Visnu; and they jatah, were born; 
manasa; from My mind-they were created by Me 
through My mind itself. 
10.7 One who knows truly this majesty and yoga of 
Mine, he becomes imbued with unwavering Yoga. 
There is no doubt about this. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.7 Yah, one who; vetti, knows; tattvatah, truly, 
i.e. just as it is; etam, this, aforesaid; vibhutim. 
majesty, (divine) manifestations; [Omnipresence.] 
and yogam, yoga, action, My own ability to 
achieve [God's omnipotence. (God's power of 
accomplishing the impossible.-M.S.)]-or, the 
capacity for mystic powers, the omniscience 
resulting from yoga (meditation), is called yoga; 
sah, he; yujyate, becomes imbued with; 
avikampena, unwavering; yogena, Yoga, 
consisting in steadfastness in perfect knowledge. 
[After realizing the personal God, he attains the 
transcendental Reality; the earlier knowledge leads 
to the latter.] There is no samsayah, doubt; atra, 
about this. With what kind of unwavering Yoga 
does he become endued? This is being answered: 
10.8 I am the origin of all; everything moves on 
owing to Me. Realizing thus, the wise ones, filled 
with fervour, adore Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.8 Aham, I, the supreme Brahman called 
Vasudeva; am the prabhavah, origin; sarvasya, of 
all, of the whole world; sarvam, everything, the 
whole world of changes, consisting of continuance, 
destruction, action and enjoyment of the fruits of 
action; pravartate, moves on; mattah, owing to Me 
alone. Matva, realizing; iti, thus; the budhah, wise 
ones, the knowers of the supreme Reality; bhava samanvitah, filled with fervour-bhava is the same 
as bhavana, meaning ardent longing for the 
supreme Reality; filled (samanvitah) with that, i.e. 
imbued with that; bhajante, adore; mam, Me. 
Besides, 
10.9 With minds fixed on Me, with lives dedicated 
to Me, enlightening each other, and always 
speaking of Me, they derive satisfaction and 
rejoice. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.9 Maccittah, with minds fixed on Me; mad-gata pranah, with lives (pranas) dedicated to Me, or 
having their organs, eyes etc. absorbed in Me, i.e. 
having their organs withdrawn into Me; 
bodhayantah, enlightening; parasparam, each 
other; and nityam, always; kathayantah, speaking 
of; mam, Me, as possessed of qualities like 
knowledge, strength, valour, etc; tusyanti, they 
derive satisfaction; and ramanti, rejoice, get 
happiness, as by coming in contact with a dear one. 
10.10 To them who are ever devoted and worship 
Me with love, I grant that possession of wisdom by 
which they reach Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.10 Tesam, to them, who, becoming devotees, 
adore Me in the manner described earlier; satata yuktanam, who are ever devoted, ever attached, 
who have become free from all external desires; 
and bhajatam, who worship-. Is it because of 
hankering for possessions? The Lord says: No, 
(they worship) priti-purvakam, with love. To them 
who worship Me with that (love), dadami, I grant; 
tam, that; buddhi-yogam, possession of wisdom buddhi means full enlightenment with regard to 
My real nature; coming in possession (yoga) of that 
is buddhi-yoga; yena, by which possession of 
wisdom consisting in full enlightenment; upayanti, 
they reach, realize as their own Self; mam, Me, the 
supreme God who is the Self. Who do so? Te, they, 
who adore Me through such disciplines as fixing 
their minds on Me, etc. 'For what purpose, or as the 
destroyer of what cause standing as an obstacle on 
the way of reaching You, do You bestow that 
possession of wisdom to those devotees of Yours?' 
In reply to such a query the Lord says: 
10.11 Out of compassion for them alone, I, residing 
in their hearts, destroy the darkness born of 
ignorance with the luminous lamp of Knowledge. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.11 Anukampartham, out of compassion; tesam 
eva, for them alone, anxious as to how they may 
have bliss; aham, I; atmabhavasthah, residing in 
their hearts-atmabhavah means the seat that is the 
heart; being seated there itself; nasayami, destroy; 
tamah, the darkness; ajnanajam, born of ignorance, 
originating from non-discrimination, the darkness 
of delusion known as false comprehension; jnana dipena, with the lamp of Knowledge, in the form 
of discriminating comprehension; i.e. bhasvata, 
with the luminous lamp of Knowledge-fed by the 
oil of divine grace resulting from devotion, fanned 
by the wind of intensity of meditation on Me, 
having the wick of the intellect imbued with the 
impressions arising from such disciplines as 
celibacy etc., in the receptacle of the detached 
mind, placed in the windless shelter of the mind 
withdrawn from objects and untainted by likes and 
dislikes, and made luminous by full Illumination 
resulting from the practice of constant 
concentration and meditation. After hearing the 
above-described majesty and yoga of the Lord, 
10.12-10.13 Arjuna said -- You are the supreme 
Brahman, the supreme Light, the supreme 
Sanctifier. All the sages as also the divine sage 
Narada, Asita, Devala and Vyasa [Although 
Narada and the other sages are already mentioned 
by the words 'all the sages', still they are named 
separately because of their eminence. Asita is the
father of Devala.] call You the eternal divine 
Person, the Primal God, the Birthless, the 
Omnipresent; and You Yourself verily tell me (so). 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.12 Bhavan, You; are the param brahma, 
supreme Brahman, the supreme Self; the param 
dhama, supreme Light; the paramam pavitram, 
supreme Sanctifier. Sarve, all; rsayah, the sages Vasistha and others; tatha, as also; the devarisih, 
divine sage; naradah, Narada; Asita and Devala 
ahuh, call; tvam, You; thus: Sasvatam, the eternal; 
divyam, divine; purusam, Person; adi-devam, the 
Primal God, the God who preceded all the gods; 
ajam, the birthless; vibhum, the Omnipresent capable of assuming diverse forms. And even 
Vyasa also speaks in this very way. Ca, and; 
svayam, You Yourself; eva, verily; bravisi, tell; me, 
me (so). 
10.12-10.13 Arjuna said -- You are the supreme 
Brahman, the supreme Light, the supreme 
Sanctifier. All the sages as also the divine sage 
Narada, Asita, Devala and Vyasa [Although 
Narada and the other sages are already mentioned 
by the words 'all the sages', still they are named 
separately because of their eminence. Asita is the 
father of Devala.] call You the eternal divine 
Person, the Primal God, the Birthless, the 
Omnipresent; and You Yourself verily tell me (so). 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.13 Bhavan, You; are the param brahma, 
supreme Brahman, the supreme Self; the param 
dhama, supreme Light; the paramam pavitram, 
supreme Sanctifier. Sarve, all; rsayah, the sages Vasistha and others; tatha, as also; the devarisih, 
divine sage; naradah, Narada; Asita and Devala 
ahuh, call; tvam, You; thus: Sasvatam, the eternal; 
divyam, divine; purusam, Person; adi-devam, the 
Primal God, the God who preceded all the gods; 
ajam, the birthless; vibhum, the Omnipresent capable of assuming diverse forms. And even 
Vyasa also speaks in this very way. Ca, and; 
svayam, You Yourself; eva, verily; bravisi, tell; me, 
me (so). 
10.14 O Kesava, I accept to be true all this which 
You tell me. Certainly, O Lord, neither the gods 
nor the demons comprehend Your glory. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.14 O Kesava, manye, I accept; to be rtam, true 
indeed; sarvam, all; etat, this that has been said by 
sages and You; yat, which; vadasi, You tell, speak; 
mam, to Me. Hi, certainly; bhagavan, O Lord; na 
devah, neither the gods; na danavah, nor the 
demons; viduh, comprehend; te, Your; vyaktim, 
glory [Prabhavam in the Commentary is the same 
as prabhavam, glory, the unqualified State.]. Since 
You are the origin of the gods and others, 
therefore, 
10.15 O supreme Person, the Creator of beings, the 
Lord of beings, God of gods, the Lord of the 
worlds, You Yourself alone know Yourself by 
Yourself. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.15 Purusottama, O supreme Person; bhuta bhavana, O Creator of beings, one who brings the 
creatures into being; bhutesa, the Lord of beings; 
deva-deva, O God of gods; jagat-pate, the Lord of 
the worlds; tvam, You; svayam, Yourself; eva, 
alone; vettha, know; atmanam, Yourself, as God 
possessed of unsurpassable powers of knowledge, 
sovereignty, strength, etc.; atmana, by Yourself. 
10.16 Be pleased to speak in full of Your own 
manifestations which are indeed divine, through 
which manifestations You exist pervading these 
worlds. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.16 Arhasi, be pleased; vaktum, to speak; 
asesena, in full; atmavibhutayah, of Your own 
manifestations; divyah hi, which are indeed divine; 
yabhih, through which; vibhutibhih, 
manifestations, manifestations of Your glory; 
tisthasi, You exist; vyapya, pervading; iman, these; 
lokan, worlds. 
10.17 O Yogi, [Here yoga stands for the results of 
yoga, viz omniscience, omnipotence, etc.; one 
possessed of these is a yogi. (See Comm. on 10.7)] 
how shall I know You by remaining ever-engaged 
in meditation? And through what objects, O Lord, 
are You to be meditated on by me? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.17 O Yogi, katham, how; aham vidyam, shall I 
know tvam, You; sada pari-cintayan, by remaining 
ever-engaged in meditation? Ca, and; kesu kesu 
bhavesu, through what objects; bhagvan, O Lord; 
cintah asi, are You to be meditated on; maya, by 
me? 
10.18 O Janardana, narrate to me again [In addition 
to what has been said in the seventh and ninth 
chapters.] Your onw yoga and (divine) 
manifestations elaborately. For, while hearing 
(Your) nectar-like (words), there is no satiety in me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.18 O Janardana: ardana is derived from ard, in 
the sense of the act of going; by virtue of making 
the janas, the demons who are opposed to the 
gods, go to hell etc. He is called Jana-ardana. Or, 
He is called so because He is prayed to [The verbal 
root ard has got a second meaning, 'to pray'.] by all 
beings for the sake of human goals, viz prosperity 
and Liberation. Kathaya, narrate to me; bhuyah, 
again, though spoken of earlier; atmanah, Your 
own; yogam, yoga-the special ability in the form of 
mystic powers; and vibhutaim, the (divine) 
manifestations-the variety of the objects of 
meditation; vistarena, elaborately. Hi, for; 
srnvatah, while hearing; (Your) amrtam, nectar-like 
speech issuing out of Your mouth; na asti, there is 
no; trptih, satiety; me, in me. 
10.19 The Blessed Lord said -- O best of the Kurus, 
now, according to their importance, I shall 
described to you My onw glories, which are indeed 
divine. There is no end to my manifestations. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.19 Kuru-srestha, O best of the Kurus; hanta, 
now; since, on the other hand, it is not possible to 
speak exhaustively of them even in a hundred 
years, (there-fore) pradhanyatah, according to their 
importance, according as those manifestations are 
pre-eminent in their respective spheres; 
kathayisyami, I shall described; te, to you; atma vibhutayah, My own glories; which are (hi, indeed) 
divyah, divine, heavenly. Na asti there is no; antah, 
end; me, to My; vistarasya, manifestations. 'Of 
those, now listen to the foremost:' 
10.20 O Gudakesa, I am the Self residing in the 
hearts of all beings, and I am the beginning and the 
middle as also the end of (all) beings. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.20 Gudakesa, O Gudakesa-gudaka means sleep, 
and isa means master; master of that (sleep) is 
gudakesa, i.e. one who has conquered sleep; [See 
also under 1.24.-Tr.] or, one who has got thick hair; 
aham, I; am the atma, Self, the indwelling Self; who 
is to be ever-meditated on as sarva-bhuta-asaya 
[Asaya-that in which are contained the impressions 
of meditations (upasanas), actions and past 
experiences.]-sthitah, residing in the hearts of all 
beings. And, by one who is unable to do so, I am to 
be meditated on through the following aspects. I 
am capable of being meditated on (through them) 
becasue aham, I; am verily the adih, beginning, the 
origin; and the madhyam, middle, continuance; ca, 
as also; the antah, end, dissolution; bhutanam, of 
(all) beings. 'I am to be meditated upon thus also:' 
10.21 Among the Adityas [viz Dhata, Mitra, 
aryama, Rudra, Varuna, Surya, Bhaga, Vivasvan, 
Pusa, Savita, Tvasta and Visnu.-Tr.] I am Visnu; 
among the luminaries, the radiant sun; among the 
(forty-nine) Maruts [The seven groups of Maruts 
are Avaha, Pravaha, Vivaha, Paravaha, Udvaha, 
Samvaha and parivaha.-Tr.] I am Marici; among 
the stars I am the moon. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.21 Adityanam, among the twelve Adityas; 
aham, I; am the Aditya called Visnu. Jyotisam, 
among the luminaries; amsuman, the radiant; 
ravih, sun. Marutam, among the different gods 
called Maruts; asmi, I am; the one called Marici. 
Naksatranam, among the stars; I am sasi, the 
moon. 
10.22 Among the Vedas I am Sama-veda; among 
the gods I am Indra. Among the organs I am the 
mind, and I am the intelligence in creatures. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.22 Vedanam, among the Vedas; I am the Sama veda. Devanam, among the gods-such as Rudras, 
Adityas and others; I am vasavah, Indra. 
Indriyanam, among the eleven organs, viz eye etc.; 
I am the manah, mind. I am the mind which is of 
the nature of reflection and doubt. And I am the 
cetana, intelligence [It is the medium for the 
manifestation of Consciousness.], the function of 
the intellect ever manifest in the aggregate of body 
and organs; bhtanam, in creatures. 
10.23 Among the Rudras [Aja, Ekapada, 
Ahirbudhnya, Pinaki, Aparajita, Tryam-baka, 
Mahesvara, Vrsakapi, Sambhu, Harana and Isvara. 
Different Puranas give different lists of eleven 
names.-Tr,] I am Sankara, and among the Yaksas 
and goblins I am Kubera [God of wealth. Yaksas 
are a class of demigods who attend on him and 
guard his wealth.]. Among the Vasus [According 
to the V.P. they are: Apa, dhruva, Soma, Dharma, 
Anila, Anala (Fire), Pratyusa and Prabhasa. The 
Mbh. and the Bh. given a different list.-Tr.] I am 
Fire, and among the mountains I am Meru. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.23 Rudranam, among the eleven Rudras, I am 
Sankara; and yaksaraksasam, among the Yaksas 
and goblins; I am vittesah, Kubera. Vasunam, 
among the eight Vasus; I am pavakah, Fire; and 
sikharinam, among the peaked mountains, I am 
Meru. 
10.24 O son of Prtha, know me to be Brhaspati, the 
foremost among the priests of kings. Among 
comanders of armies I am Skanda; among large 
expanses of water I am the sea. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.24 O son of Prtha viddhi, know; mam, Me; to be 
Brahaspati, mukhyam, the foremost; purodhasam, 
among the priests of kings. Being as he is the priest 
of Indra, he should be the foremost. Senaninam, 
among commaners of armies; I am Skanda, the 
commander of the armies of gods. Sarasam, among 
large expanses of water, among reservoirs dug by 
gods (i.e. among nature reservoirs); I am sagarah, 
the sea. 
10.25 Among the great sages I am Bhrgu; of words 
I am the single syllable (Om) [Om is the best 
because it is the name as well as the symbol of 
Brahman.]. Among rituals I am the ritual of Japa 
[Japa, muttering prayers-repeating passages from 
the Vedas, silently repeating names of deities, etc.
Rituals often involve killing of animals. But Japa is 
free from such injury, and hence the best.] of the 
immovables, the Himalaya. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.25 Maharsinam, among the great sages, I am 
Bhrgu, Giram, of words, of utterances, in the form 
of words; I am the ekam, single; aksaram, syllable 
Om. Yajnanam, among rituals; I am the japa yajnah, rituals of Japa. Sthavaranam, of the 
immovables, I am the Himalaya. 
10.26 Among all trees (I am) the Asvatha (peepul), 
and Narada among the divine sages. Among the 
dandharvas [A class of demigods regarded as the 
musicians of gods.] (I am) Citraratha; among the 
perfected ones, the sage Kapila. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.26 Sarva-vrksanam, among all trees, (I am) the 
Asvatta; and Narada devarsinam, among the 
divine sages-those who were gods and became 
sages by virtue of visualizing Vedic mantras; 
among them I am Narada. Gandharvanam, among 
the gandharvas, I am the gandharva called 
Citraratha. Siddhanam, among the perfected ones, 
among those who, from their very birth, were 
endowed with an abundance of the wealth of 
virtue, knowledge and renunciation; (I am) munih, 
the sage Kapila. 
10.27 Among horses, know Me to be Uccaihsravas, 
born of nectar; Airavata among the lordly 
elephants; and among men, the Kind of men. 
[Uccaihsravas and Airavata are respectively the 
divine horse and elephant of Indra.] 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.27 Asvanam, among horses; viddhi, know; 
mam, Me; to be the horse named Uccaihsravas; 
amrta-udbhavam, born of nectar-born when (the 
sea was) churned (by the gods) for nectar. 
Airavata, the son of Iravati, gajendranam, among 
the Lordly elephants; 'know Me to be so' remains 
understood. And naranam, among men; know Me 
as the naradhipam, King of men. 
10.28 Among weapons I am the thunderbolt; 
among cows I am kamadhenu. I am Kandarpa, the 
Progenitor, and among serpents I am Vasuki. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.28 Ayudhanam, among weapons; I am the 
vajram, thunderbolt, made of the bones of (the 
sage) Dadhici. Dhenunam, among milch cows; I 
am kama-dhuk, Kamadhenu, which was the 
yielder of all desires of (the sage) Vasistha; or it 
means a cow in general which gives milk at all 
times. I am Kandarpa, prajanah, the Progenitor, 
(the god) Kama (Cupid). Sarpanam, among 
serpents, among the various serpents, I am Vasuki, 
the kind of serpents. 
10.29 Among snakes I am Ananta, and Varuna 
among gods of the waters. Among the manes I am 
Aryama, and among the maintainers of law and 
order I am Yama (King of death). 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.29 Naganam, among snakes, of a particular 
species of snakes; asmi, I am Ananta, the King of 
snakes. And Varuna, the King yadasam, of the 
gods of the waters. Pitrnam, among the manes; I 
am the King of the manes, named Aryama. And 
samyamatam, among the maintainers of law and 
order I am Yama. 
10.30 Among demons I am Prahlada, and I am 
Time among reckoners of time. And among 
animals I am the loin, and among birds I am 
Garuda. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.30 Daityanam, among demons, the descendants 
of Diti, I am the one called Prahlada. And I am 
kalah, Time; kalayatam, among reckoners of time, 
of those who calculate. And mrganam, among 
animals; I am mrgendrah, the loin, or the tiger. 
And paksinam, among birds; (I am) vainateyah, 
Garuda, the son of Vinata. 
10.31 Of the purifiers I am air; among the wielders 
of weapons I am Rama. Among fishes, too, I am the 
shark; I am Ganga among rivers. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.31 Pavatam, of the purifiers; I am pavanah, air. 
Sastra-bhrtam, among weilders of weapons, I am 
Rama, son of Dasaratha. Jhasanam, among fishes 
etc; I am the particular species of fish called 
makarah shark. I am jahnavi, Ganga; srotasam, 
among rivers, among streams of water. 
10.32 O Arjuna, of creations I am the beginning and 
the end as also the middle, I am the knowledge of 
the Self among knowledge; of those who debate I 
am vada. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.32 O Arjuna sarganam, of creations; I am the 
adih, beginning; ca, and ; he antah, end; ca eva, as 
also; the madhyam, middle-I am the origin, 
continuance and dissolution. At the 
commencement (verse 20) origin, end, etc. only of 
things possessed of souls were spoken of, but here 
the mention is of all creations in general. This is the 
difference. Vidyanam, among knowledges; I am 
the adhyatma-vidya, knowledge of the Self, it 
being the foremost because of its leading to 
liberation. Pravadatam, of those who debate; aham, 
I; am vadah, Vada, which is preeminent since it is a 
means to determining true purport. Hence I am 
that . By the word pravadatam are here meant the 
different kinds of debate held by debators, viz 
Vada, Jalpa, and Vitanda. [Vada: discussion with
open-mindedness, with a veiw to determining true 
purport; jalpa: pointless debate; Vitanda: 
wrangling discussion. [Jalpa is that mode of debate 
by which both parties establish their own 
viewpoint through direct and indirect proofs, and 
refute the view of the opponent through 
circumvention (Chala) and false generalization 
(Jati) and by pointing out unfitness (of the 
opponent) tobe argued with (Nigraha-sthana). But 
where one party establishes his viewpoint, and the 
other refutes it through circumvention, false 
generalization and showing the unfitness of the 
opponent to be argued with, without establishing 
his own views, that is termed Vitanda. Jalpa and 
Vitanda result only in a trial of streangth between 
the opponents, who are both desirous of victory, 
But the result of Vada is the ascertainment of truth 
between the teacher and the disciple or between 
others, both unbiased.-Gloss of Sridhara Swami on 
this verse.]-Tr.] 
10.33 Of the letters I am the letter a, and of the 
group of compund words I am (the compound 
called) Dvandva. [Dvandva: A compound of two 
or more words which, if not compounded, would 
stand in the same case and be connected by the 
conjunction 'and'.-Tr.] I Mayself am the infinite 
time; I am the Dispenser with faces everywhere. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.33 Aksaranam, of the letters; I am the akarah, 
letter a. Samasikasya, of the group of compound 
words, I am the compund (called) Dvandva. 
Besieds, aham eva, I Myself; am the aksayah, 
infinite, endless; kalah, time, well known as 
'moment' etc.; or, I am the supreme God who is 
Kala (Time, the measurer) even of time. I am the 
dhata, Dispenser, the dispenser of the fruits of 
actions of the whole world; visvatomukhah, with 
faces everwhere. 
10.34 And I am Death, the destroyer of all; and the 
prosperity of those destined to be prosperous. Of 
the feminine [Narinam may mean 'of the feminine 
qualities'. According to Sridhara Swami and S., the 
words fame etc. signify the goddesses of the 
respective qualities. According to M.S. these seven 
goddesses are the wives of the god Dharma.-Tr.] (I 
am) fame, beauty, speech, memory, intelligence, 
fortitude and forbearance. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.34 Death which is of two kinds-one destroying 
wealth, and the other destroying life-, [Here Ast. 
adds: tatra yah prana-harah sah (sarva-harah 
ucyate)-Among them, that which destroys life (is 
called sarva-harah).-Tr.] is called sarva-harah, the 
destroyer of all. I am that. This is the meaning. Or, 
the supreme God is the all-destroyer because He 
destroys everything during dissolution. I am He. 
And I am udbhavah, prosperity, eminence, and the 
means to it. Of whom? Bhavisyatam, of those 
destined to be prosperous, i.e. of those who are fit 
for attaining eminence. Narinam, of the feminine 
qualities; I am kirtih, fame; srih, beauty; vak, 
speech; smrtih, memory; medha, intelligence 
dhrtih, fortitude; and ksama, forbearance. I am 
these excellent feminine quialities, by coming to 
possess even a trace of which one considers himself 
successful. 
10.35 I am also the Brhat-sama of the Sama (-
mantras); of the metres, Gayatri. Of the months I 
am Marga-sirsa, and of the seasons, spring. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.35 I am tatha, also; the Brhat-sama, the foremost 
samnam, of the Sama-mantras. Chandasam, of the 
metres, of the Rk-mantras having the metres 
Gayatri etc.; I am the Rk called Gayatri. This is
meaning. Masanam, of the months, I am Marga sirsa (Agrahayana, November-December). Rtunam, 
of the seasons; kusumakarah, spring. 
10.36 Of the fraudulent I am the gambling; I am the 
irresistible command of the mighty. I am excellene, 
I am effort, I am the sattva quality of those 
possessed of sattva. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.36 Chalayatam, of the fraudulent, of the 
deceitful; I am the dyutam, gambling, such as 
playing with dice. I am the tejah, irresistible 
command; tejasvinam, of the mighty. [Some 
translate this as 'the splendour of the splendid'.-
Tr.] I am the jayah, excellence of the excellent. 
[Some translate this as 'the victory of the 
victorious'.-Tr.] I am the vyavasayah, effort of the 
persevering. I am the sattvam, sattva quality; [The 
result of sattva, viz virtue, knowledge, detachment, 
etc.] sattvavatam, of those possessed of sattva. 
10.37 Of the vrsnis [The clan to which Sri krsna 
belonged, known otherwise as the Yadavas.] I am 
Vasudeva; of the Pandavas, Dhananjaya (Arjuna). 
And of the wise, I am Vyasa; of the omniscient, the 
omniscient Usanas. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.37 Vrsninam, of the Vrsnis, [Here Ast. adds 
yadavanam, of the Yadavas.-Tr.] I am Vasudeva- I 
who am this person, your friend. Pandavanam, of 
the Pandavas, (I am) Dhananjaya, you yourself. 
Api, and; muninam, of the wise, of the thoughtful, 
of those who know of all things, I am Vyasa. 
kavinam, of the omniscient (i.e. of the those who 
know the past, present and future), I am the 
omniscient Usanas (Sukracarya). 
10.38 Of the punishers I am the rod; I am the 
righteous policy of those who desire to conquer. 
And of things secret, I am verily silence; I am 
knowledge of the men of knowledge.. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.38 Damayatam, of the punishers; I am dandah, 
the rod, which is the means of controlling the 
lawless. I am the nitih, righteous policy; jagisatam, 
of those who desire to conquer. And guhyanam, of 
things secret; I am verily maunam, silence. I am 
jnanam, knowledge; jnanavatam, of the men of 
knowledge. 
10.39 Moreover, O Arjuna, whatsoever is the seed 
of all beings, that I am. There is no thing moving or 
non-moving which can exist without Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.39 Ca, moreover; O Arjuna, yat api, whatsoever; 
is the bijam, seed, the source of growth ; sarva bhutanam, of all beings; tat, that I am. As a 
conclusion of the topic the Lord states in brief His 
divine manifestations: Na tat asti bhutam, there is 
no thing; cara-acaram, moving or non-moving; yat, 
which; syat, can exist; vina maya, without Me. For 
whatever is rejected by Me, from whatever I 
withdraw Myself will have no substance, and will 
become a non-entity. Hence the meaning is that 
everything has Me as its essence. 
10.40 O destroyer of enemies, there is no limit to 
My divine manifestations. This description of (My) 
manifestations, however, has been stated by Me by 
way illustration. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.40 Parantapa, O destroyer of enemies; asti, there 
is; na, no; antah, limit; to mama, My; divyanam, 
divine; vibhutinam, manifestations. Indeed, it is 
not possible for anyone to speak or know of the 
limit of the divine manifestations of the of the all pervading God. Esah, this; vistarah, description; 
vibhuteh, of (My) manifestations; tu, however; 
prokatah, has been stated; maya, by Me; 
uddesatah, by way of illustration, partially. 
10.41 Whatever object [All living beings] is verily 
endowed with majesty, possessed of prosperity, or 
is energetic, you know for certain each of them as 
having a part of My power as its source. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.41 Yat yat, whatever; sattvam, object in the 
world; is eva, verily; vibhutimat, endowed with 
majesty; srimad, possessed of prosperity; va, or; is 
urjitam, energetic, possessed of vigour; tvam, you; 
avagaccha, know; eva, for certain; tat tat, each of 
them; as mama tejomsa-sambhavam, having a part 
(amsa) of My (mama), of God's, power (teja) as its 
source (sambhavam). 
10.42 Or, on the other hand, what is the need of 
your knowing this extensively, O Arjuna? I remain 
sustaning this whole creation in a special way with 
a part (of Myself). 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
10.42 Athava, or, on the other hand; kim, what is 
the need; of tava jnatena, your knowing; etena 
bahuna, this extensively-but imcompletely-in the 
above manner, O Arjuna? You listen to this subject 
that is going to be stated in its fullness: Aham, I; 
sthitah, remain; vistabhya, sustaining, supporting, 
holding firmly, in a special way; idam, this; 
krtsnam, whole; jagat, creation; ekamsena, by a 
part, by a foot [The Universe is called a foot of His 
by virtue of His having the limiting adjunct of 
being its efficient and material cause.] (of Myself), 
i.e. as the Self of all things [As the material and the 
efficient cause of all things]. The Vedic text, 'All 
beings form a foot of His' (Rg., Pu. Su. 10.90.3; Tai. 
Ar. 3.12.3) support this. [A Form constituted by the 
whole of creation has been presented in this 
chapter for meditation. Thereby the unqualified 
transcendental Reality, implied by the word tat (in 
tattva-masi) and referred to by the latter portion of 
the Commentator's quotation (viz 
tripadasyamrtam divi: The immortal three-footed 
One is established in His own effulgence), becomes 
established.] 
11.1 Arjuna said -- This delusion of mine has 
departed as a result of that speech which is most 
secret and known as pertaining to the Self, and 
which was uttered by You for my benefit. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.1 Ayam, this; mahah, delusion; mama, of mine; 
vigatah, has departed, i.e., my non-discriminating 
idea has been removed; tena, as a result of that; 
vacah, speech of Yours; which is paramam, most, 
supremely; guhyam, secret; and adhyatma sanjnitam, known as pertaining to the Self-dealing 
with discrimination between the Self and the non Self; and yat, which; was uktam, uttered; tvaya, by 
You; madanugrahaya, for my benefit, out of favour 
for me. Further, 
11.2 O you with eyes like lotus leaves, the origin 
and dissolution of beings have been heard by me in 
detail from You. ['From You have been heard the 
origin and dissolution of beings in You.'] And 
(Your) undecaying glory, too, (has been heard). 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.2 Kamala-partraksa, O You with eyes like lotus 
leaves; bhava-apyayau, the origin and dissolution these two; bhutanam, of beings; srutau, have been 
heard; maya, by me; vistarasah, in detail-not in 
brief; tvattah, from You. Ca, and; (Your) avyayam, 
undecaying; mahatmyam, glory, too;-has been 
heard-(these last words) remain understood. 
11.3 O supreme Lord, so it is, as You speak about 
Yourself. O supreme Person, I wish to see the 
divine form of Yours. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.3 Parama-isvara, O supreme Lord; evam, so; 
etat, it is-not otherwise; yatha, as; tvam, You; attha, 
speak; atmanam, about Yourself. Still, 
purusottama, O supreme Person; iccahmi, I wish; 
drastum, to see; the aisvaram, divine; rupam, form; 
te, of Yours, of Visnu, endowed with Knowledge, 
Sovereignty, Power, Strength, Valour and 
Formidability. 
11.4 O Lord, if You think that it is possible to be 
seen by me, then, O Lord of Yoga, You show me 
Your eternal Self. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.4 Prabho, O Lord, Master; yadi, if; manyase, You 
think; iti, that; tat sakyam, it is possible; drastum, 
to be see; maya, by me, by Arjuna; tatah, then, 
since I am very eager to see, therefore; yogeswara, 
O Lord of Yoga, of yogis-Yoga stands for yogis; 
their Lord is yogeswara; tvam, You; darsaya, show; 
me, me, for my sake; atmanam avyayam, Your 
eternal Self. Being thus implored by Arjuna, 
11.5 The Blessed Lord said -- O son of Prtha, 
behold My forms in (their) hundreds and in 
thousands, of different kinds, celestial, and of 
various colours and shapes. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.5 O son of Prtha, pasya, behold; me, My; rupani, 
forms; satasah, in (their) hundreds; atha, and; 
sahasrasah, in thousands, i.e. in large numbers. 
And they are nana-vidhani, of different kinds; 
divyani, celestial, supernatural; and nana-varna akrtini, of various colours and shapes-forms which 
have different (nana) colours (varna) such as blue, 
yellow, etc. as also (different) shapes (akrtayah), 
having their parts differently arranged. 
11.6 See the Adiyas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the two 
Asvins and the Maruts. O scion of the Bharata 
dynasty, behold also the many wonders not seen 
before. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.6 Pasya, see; adityan, the twelve Adityas; vasun, 
the eight Vasus; rudran, the eleven Rudras; 
asvinau, the two Asvins; and amarutah, the 
Maruts, who are divided into seven groups of 
seven each. Bharata, O scion of the Bharata 
dynasty; pasya, behold; tatha, also; bahuni, the 
many other; ascaryani, wonders; adrstapurvani, 
not seen before-by you or anyone else in the
human world. Not only this much,-
11.7 See now, O gudakesa, O Gudakesa (Arjuna), 
the entire Universe together with the moving and 
the non-moving, concentrated at the same place 
here in My body, as also whatever else you would 
like to see. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.7 Pasya, see; adya, now; O Gudakesa, the 
krtsnam, entire; jagat, Universe; sa-cara-acaram, 
existing together with the moving and the non moving; ekastham, concentrated at the same place; 
iha, here; mama dehe, in My body; ca, as also; yat 
anyat, whatever else-even those victory, defeat, etc. 
with regard to which you expressed doubt in, 
'whether we shall win, or whether they shall 
conquer us' (2.6); if icchasi, you would like; 
drastum, to see them. 
11.8 But you are not able to see Me merely with 
this eye of yours. I grant you the supernatural eye; 
bhold My divine Yoga. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.8 Tu, but; na sakyase, you are not able; drastum, 
to see; mam, Me, who have assumed the Cosmic 
form; eva, merely; anena, with this natural; sva caksusa, eye of yours. However, dadami, I grant; 
te, you; the divyam, supernatural; caksuh, eye, by 
which supernatural eye you shall be able to see 
Pasya, behold with that; me, My, God's aisvaram, 
divine; yogam, Yoga, i.e. the superabundance of 
the power of Yoga [The power of accomplishing 
the impossible.-M.S.]. 
11.9 Sanjaya said -- O King, having spoken thus, 
thereafter, Hari [Hari: destroyer of ignorance along 
with its consequences.] (Krsna) the great Master of 
Yoga, showed to the son of Prtha the supreme 
divine form: 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.9 Rajan, O King, Dhrtarastra; uktva, having 
spoken evam, thus, in the manner stated above; 
tatah, thereafter; harih, Hari, Narayana; maha yogeswarah, the great Master of Yoga-who is great 
(mahan) and also the master (isvara) of Yoga; 
darasyamasa showed; parthaya, to the son of 
Prtha; the paramam, supreme; aisvaram, divine; 
rupam, form, the Cosmic form: 
11.10 Having many faces and eyes, possessing 
many wonderful sights, adorned with numerous 
celestial ornaments, holding many uplifted 
heavenly weapons; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.10 A form aneka-vaktra-nayanam, having many 
faces and eyes; aneka-adbhuta-darsanam, 
possessing many wonderful sights; as also aneka divya-abharanam, adorned with numerous 
celestial ornaments; and divya-aneka-udyata ayudham, holding many uplifted heavenly 
weapons. This whole portion is connected with the 
verb '(He) showed' in the earlier verse. Moreover, 
11.11 Wearing heavenly garlands and apparel, 
anointed with heavenly scents, abounding in all 
kinds of wonder, resplendent, infinite, and with 
faces everywhere. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.11 Divya-malya-ambara-dharam, wearing 
heavenly garlands and apparel-the God wearing 
celestial flowers and clothings; divya-gandha anulepanam, anointed with heavenly scents; sarva ascaryamayam, abounding in all kinds of wonder; 
devam, resplendent; anantam, infinite, boundless; 
and visvato-mukham, with faces everywhere-He 
being the Self of all beings. 'He showed (to 
Arjuna)', or 'Arjuna saw', is to be supplied. An 
illustration is once more being given of the 
effulgence of the Cosmic form of the Lord: 
11.12 Should the effulgence of a thousand suns 
blaze forth simultaneously in the sky, that might be 
similar to the radiance of that exalted One. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.12 Should the bhah, effulgence; surya sahasrasya, of a thousand suns; utthita bhavet, 
blaze forth; yugapat, simultaneously; divi, in the 
sky, or in heaven which is the third as counted 
(from this earth);sa, that; yadi syat, might be-or it 
might not be-; sadrsi, similar; to the bhasah, 
radiance; tasya, of that; mahat-manah, exalted One, 
the Cosmic Person Himself. The idea is that the 
brillinace of the Cosmic Person surely excels even 
this! Further, 
11.13 At that time, Pandava saw there, in the body 
of the God of gods, the whole diversely 
differentiated Universe united in the one (Cosmic 
form). 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.13 Tada, at that time; pandavah, Pandava, 
Arjuna; apasyat, saw; tatra, there, in that Cosmic 
form; sarire, in the body; devadevasya, of the God 
of gods, of Hari; krtsnam, the whole; jagat, 
Universe; anekadha, deversely; pravibhaktam, 
differentiated-into groups of gods, manes, human 
beings, and others; ekastham, united in the one 
(Consmic form). 
11.14 Then, filled with wonder, with hairs standing 
on end, he, Dhananjaya, (Arjuna), bowing down 
with his head to the Lord, said with folded hands: 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.14 Tatah, then, having seen Him; sah, he, 
Dhananjaya; became vismaya-avistah, filled with 
wonder; and hrsta-roma, had his hairs standing on 
end. Becoming filled with humility, pranamya, 
bowing down, bowing down fully; [With abundant 
respect and devotion.] sirasa, with his head; 
devam, to the Lord, who had assumed the Cosmic 
form; abhasata, he said; krta-anjalih, with folded 
hands, with palms joined in salutation: How? 'I am 
seeing the Cosmic form that has been revealed by 
You'-thus expressing his own experience, 
11.15 Arjuna said -- O God, I see in Your body all 
the gods as also hosts of (various) classes of beings; 
Brahma the ruler, sitting on a lotus seat, and all the 
heavely sages and serpents. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.15 Deva, O God; pasyami, I see, perceive; tava 
dehe, in Your body; sarvan, all; the devan, gods; 
tatha, as also; bhuta-visesa-sanghan, hosts of 
(various) classes of beings, groups of moving and 
non-moving living things having different shapes; 
and besides, brahmanam, Brahma, with four faces; 
isam, the Ruler of creatures; kamalasana-stham, 
sitting on a lotus seat, i.e. sitting on Mount Meru 
which forms the pericarp of the lotus that is the 
earth; and sarvan, all; the divyan, heavenly; rsin, 
sages-Vasistha and others; and (the heavenly) 
uragan, serpents-Vasuki and others. 
11.16 I see You as possessed of numerous arms, 
bellies, mouths and eyes; as having infinite forms 
all around. O Lord of the Universe, O Cosmic 
Person, I see not Your limit nor the middle, nor 
again the beginning! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.16 Pasyami, I see; tvam, You; aneka-bahu-udara vaktra-netram, as possessed of numerous arms, 
bellies, mouths and eyes; ananta-rupam, having 
infinite forms; sarvatah, all around. Visveswara, O 
Lord of the Universe; visva-rupa, O Cosmic 
Person; na pasyami, I see not; ['I do not see-because 
of Your all-pervasiveness.'] tava, Your; antam, end; 
na madhyam, nor the middle-what lies between 
two extremities; na punah, nor again; the adim, 
beginning-I see not the limit (end) nor the middle, 
nor again the beginning, of You who are God! 
Furthermore, 
11.17 I see You as wearing a diadem, wielding a 
mace, and holding a disc; a mass of brilliance 
glowing all around, difficult to look at from all 
sides, possessed of the radiance of the blazing fire 
and sun, and immeasurable. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.17 Pasyami, I see; tvam, You; as kiritinam, 
wearing a diadem-kirita is a kind of decoration for 
the head; one having it is kiriti; gadinam, wielding 
a mace; and also cakrinam, holding a disc; 
tejorasim, a mass of brilliance; sarvatah 
diptimantam, glowing all around; durniriksyam, 
difficult to look at; samantat, from all sides, at 
every point; as though dipta-analarka-dyutim, 
possessed of the radiance (dyuti) of the blazing 
(dipta) fire (anala) and sun (arka); and aprameyam, 
immeasurable, i.e. beyond limitation. 'For this 
reason also, i.e., by seeing Your power of Yoga, I 
infer' that 
11.18 You are the Immutable, the supreme One to 
be known; You are the most perfect repository of 
this Universe. You are the Imperishable, the 
Protector of the ever-existing religion; You are the 
eternal Person. This is my belief. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.18 Tvam, You; are the aksaram, Immutable; the 
paramam, supreme One, Brahman; veditavyam, to 
be known-by those aspiring for Liberation. You are 
the param, most perfect; nidhanam, repository where things are deposited, i.e. the ultimate resort; 
asya visvasya, of this Universe, of the entire 
creation. Further. You are the avyayah, 
Imperishable-there is no decay in You; the sasvata dharma-gopta, Protector (gopta) of the ever existing (sasvata) religion (dharma). You are the 
sanatanah, eternal; transcendental purusah, 
Person. This is me, my; matah, belief-what is meant 
by me. Moreover, 
11.19 I see You as without beginning, middle and 
end, possessed of infinite valour, having 
innumerable arms, having the sun and the moon as 
eyes, having a mouth like a blazing fire, and 
heating up this Universe by Your own brilliance. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.19 Pasyami, I see; tvam, You; as anadi-madhya antam, without beginning, middle and end; 
ananta-viryam, possessed of infinite valour; and 
also ananta-bahum, having innumerable arms; 
sasi-surya-netram, having the sun and the moon as 
the eyes; dipta-hutasavakram, having a mouth like 
a blazing fire; tapantam, heating up; idam, this; 
visvam, Universe; sva-tejasa, by Your own 
birlliance. 
11.20 Indeed, this intermediate space between 
heaven and earth as also all the directions are 
pervaded by You alone. O exalted One, the three 
worlds are struck with fear by seeing this strange, 
fearful form of Yours. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.20 Hi, indeed; idam, this; antaram, intermediate 
space; dyavaprthivyoh, between heaven and earth; 
ca, as also; sarvah, all; the disah, direction; 
vyaptam, are pervaded; tvaya, by You; ekena, 
alone, who have assumed the Cosmic form. 
Mahatman, O exalted One, who by nature are 
high-minded; the lokatrayam, three worlds; 
pravyathitam, are struck with fear, or are 
perturbed; drstva, by seeing; idam, this; abdhutam, 
strange, astonishing; ugram, fearful, terrible; 
rupam, form; tava, of Yours. Therefore, now, in 
order to clear that doubt which Arjuna earlier had as in, 'whether we shall win, or whether they shall 
conquer' (2.6)-, the Lord proceeds with the idea, 'I 
shall show the inevitable victory of the Pandavas.' 
Visualizing that, Arjuna said: 'Moreover-'. 
11.21 Those very groups of gods enter into You; 
struck with fear, some extol (You) with joined 
palms. Groups of great sages and perfected beings 
praise You with elaborate hymns,saying 'May it be 
well!' 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.21 Ami hi, those very; sura-sanghah, groups of 
gods, the soldiers engaged in battle-groups of gods 
such as the Vasus who have descended here in the 
form of human beings for eliminating the burden 
of the earth; visanti, enter-are seen to be entering; 
tvam, You. Bhitah, struck with fear, and unable to 
flee; kecit, some among them; grnanti, extol You; 
pranjalayah, with their palms joined. Maharsi siddha [Siddha: A semi-divine being supposed to 
be of great purity and holiness, and said to be 
particularly characterized by eight supernatural 
faculties called siddhis.-V.S.A.]-sanghah, groups of 
great sages and perfected beings; seeing protents 
foreboding evil, etc. as the battle became imminent; 
stuvanti, praise; tvam, You; puskalabhih, with 
elaborate, full; stutibhih, hymns; uktva, saying; 
'svasti iti, May it be well!' And further, 
11.22 Those who are the Rudras, the Adityas, the 
Vasus and the Sadhyas [sadhyas: A particular class 
of celestial beings.-V.S.A.], the Visve (-devas), the 
two Asvins, the Maruts and the Usmapas, and 
hosts of Gandharvas, Yaksas, demons and Siddhas all of those very ones gaze at You, being indeed 
struck with wonder. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.22 Ye, those who are; the rudra-adityah, Rudras 
and Adityas; vasavah, the Vasus; and sadhyah, the 
Sadhyas-the groups of Rudras and other gods; the 
gods visve, Visve-devas; and asvinau, the two 
Asvins; marutah, the Maruts; and usmapah, the 
Usmapas, (a class of) manes; and gandharva yaksa-asura-siddha-sanghah, hosts of Gandharvas-
viz Haha, Huhu and others-, Yaksas-viz Kubera 
and others-, demons-Virocana and others-, and 
Siddhas-Kapila and others; sarve eva, all of those 
very ones; viksante, gaze; tva, (i.e.) tvam, at You; 
vismitah eva, being indeed struck with wonder. 
For, 
11.23 O mighty-armed One, seeing Your immense 
form with many mouths and eyes, having 
numerous arms, thighs and feet, with many bellies, 
and fearful with many teeth, the creatures are 
struck with terror, and so am I. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.23 Mahabaho, O mighty-armed One; drstva, 
seeing; te, Your; mahat, immence, very vast; upam, 
form of this kind; bahu-vaktra-netram, with many 
mouths and eyes; bahu-bahu-uru-padam, having 
many arms, thighs and feet; and further, bahu udaram, with many bellies; and bahu-damstra karalam, fearful with many teeth; lokah, the 
creatures in the world; are pravya-thitah, struck 
with terror; tatha, and so also; am even aham, I. 
The reason of that is this: 
11.24 O Visnu, verily, seeing Your form touching 
heaven, blazing, with many colours, open mouthed, with fiery large eyes, I , becoming 
terrified in my mind, do not find steadiness and 
peace. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.24 O Visnu, hi, verily; drstva, seeing; tvam, You; 
nabhah-sprsam, touching heaven; diptam, blazing; 
aneka-varnam, with many colours, (i.e.) possessed 
of many frightening forms; vyatta-ananam, open mouthed; dipta-visala-netram, with firey large 
eyes; I, pravyathita-antara-atma, becoming terrified 
in my mind; na vindami, do not find; dhrtim, 
steadiness; ca, and; samam, peace, calmness of 
mind. Why? 
11.25 Having merely seen Your mouths made 
terrible with (their) teeth and resembling the fire of 
Dissolution, I have lost the sense of direction and 
find no comfort. Be gracious, O Lord of gods, O 
Abode of the Universe. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.25 Drstva eva, having merely seen; te, Your; 
mukhani, mouths; damstra-karalani, made terrible 
with (their) teeth; and kala-anala-sannibhani, 
resembling the fire of Dissolution is kalanala; 
similar to that; na jane, I have lost; the sense of 
disah, direction-I do not know the directions as to 
which is East or which is West; and hence, na 
labhe, find no; sarma, comfort. Therefore, prasida, 
be gracious; devesa, O Lord of gods; jagannivasa, 
O Abode of the Universe! 'The apprehension which 
was there of my getting defeated by those offers, 
that too has cleared away, since-' 
11.26 And into You (enter) all those sons of 
Dhrtarastra along with multitudes of the rulers of 
the earth; (also) Bhisma, Drona and that son of a 
Suta (Karna), together with even our prominent 
warriors. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.26 Ca, and; tvam, into You-this is to be 
connected with 'rapidly enter' in the next verse; 
sarve, all; ami, those; putrah, sons-Duryodhana 
and others; dhrtarastrasya, of Dhrtarastra; saha, 
along with; avanipala-sanghaih, multitudes of the 
rulers (pala) of the earth (avani); also Bhisma, 
Drona, tatha, and; asau, that; suta-putrah, son of a 
Suta, Karna; saha, together with; api, even; 
asmadiyaih, our; yodha-mukhyaih, prominent 
warriors, the commanders-Dhrstadyumna and 
others. Moreover, 
11.27 They rapidly enter into Your terrible mouths 
with cruel teeths! Some are seen sticking in the 
gaps between the teeth, with their heads crushed! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.27 Visanti, they enter; tvarmanah, rapidly, in 
great haste; into te, Your; vaktrani, mouths;-what 
kind of mouths?-bhayanakani, terrible; damstra karalani, with cruel teeth. Besides, among these 
who have entered the mouths, kecit, some; 
samdrsyante, are see; vilagna, sticking, like meat 
eaten; dasanantaresu, in the gaps between the 
teeth; uttamangaih, with their heads; curnitaih, 
crushed. As to how they enter, he says: 
11.28 As the numerous currents of the waters of 
rivers rush towards the sea alone so also do those 
heroes of the human world enter into Your blazing 
mouths. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.28 Yatha, as; the bahavah, numerous; ambu vegah, currents of the waters, particularly the swift 
ones; nadinam, of flowing rivers; dravanti 
abhimukhah, rush towards, enter into; the 
samudram, sea; eva, alone; tatha, so also; do ami, 
those; nara-loka-virah, heroes of the human world Bhisma and others; visanti, enter into; tava, Your; 
abhi-vijvalanti, blazing, glowing; vaktrani, mouths. 
Why do they enter, and how? In answer Arjuna 
says: 
11.29 As moths enter with increased haste into a 
glowing fire for destruction, in that very way do 
the creatures enter into Your mouths too, with 
increased hurry for destruction. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.29 Yatha, as; patangah, moths, flying insects; 
visanti, enter; samrddha-vegah, with increased 
haste; into a pradiptam, glowing; jvalanam, fire; 
nasaya, for destruction; tatha eva, in that very way; 
do the lokah, creatures; visanti, enter into; tava, 
Your; vaktrani, mouths; api, too; samrddha-vegah, 
with increased hurry; nasaya, for destruction. You, 
again 
11.30 You lick Your lips while devouring all the 
creatures from every side with flaming mouths 
which are completely filling the entire world with 
heat. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.30 O Visnu, Your fierce rays are acorching. 
[M.S., S., and S.S. construe 'completely...heat' to 
qualify 'fierce rays' in the second sentence. 
However, the use of kim ca (moreover) in the 
Comm. suggests the translation as above.-Tr.] 
Lelihyase, You lick Your lips, You taste; 
grasamanah, while devouring, while taking in; 
samagran, all; lokan, the creatures; samantat, from 
all sides; jvaladbhih, with flaming; vadanaih, 
mouths; which are apurya, completely filling; 
samagram, the whole- together (saha) with the 
foremost (agrena); jagat, world; tejobhih, with heat. 
Moreover, O Visnu, the all-pervading One, tava, 
Your; ugrah, fierce; bhasah, rays; are pratapanti, 
scorching. Since You are of such a terrible nature, 
therefore 
11.31 Tell me who You are, fierce in form. 
Salutation be to you, O supreme God; be gracious. 
I desire to fully know You who are the Prima One. 
For I do not understand Your actions! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.31 Akhyahi, tell; me; kah, who; bhavan, You are; 
ugrarupah, fierce in form. Namah, salutation; astu, 
be; te, to You; deva-vara, O supreme God, foremost 
among the gods. Prasida, be gracious. Icchami, I 
desire; vijnatum, to fully know; bhavantam, You; 
adyam, who are the Primal One, who exist in the 
beginning. Hi, for; na prajanami, I do not 
understand; tava, Your; pravrttim, actions! 
11.32 The Blessed Lord said -- I am the world destroying Time, [Time: The supreme God with 
His limiting adjunct of the power of action.] grown 
in stature [Pravrddhah, mighty-according to S.-Tr.] 
and now engaged in annihilating the creatures. 
Even without you, all the warriors who are arrayed 
in the confronting armies will cease to exist! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.32 Asmi, I am; the loka-ksaya-krt, world destroying; kalah, Time; pravrddhah, grown in 
stature. Hear the purpose for which I have grown 
in stature: I am iha, now; pravrttah, engaged; 
samahartum, in annihilating; lokan, the creatures. 
Api, even; rte tva, without you; sarve, all-from 
whom your apprehension had arisen; the yodhah, 
warriors-Bhisma, Drona, Karna and others; ye, 
who are; avasthitah, arrayed; pratyanikesu, in the 
connfronting armies-in every unit of the army 
confronting the other; na bhavisyanti, will cease to 
exist. Since this is so 
11.33 Therefore you rise up, (and) gain fame; and 
defeating the enemies, enjoy a prosperous 
kingdom. These have been killed verily by Me 
even earlier; be you merely an instrument, O 
Savyasacin (Arjuna). 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.33 Tasmat, therefore; tvam, you; uttistha, rise 
up; (and) labhasva, gain; the yasah, fame, that 
Arjuna has conquered the Atirathas [Atiratha-see 
note under 1.4.6.-Tr.], Bhisma, Drona and others, 
who are unconquerable even by the gods. Such 
fame can be acquired only by virtuous actions. 
Jitva, by defeating; satrun, the enemies, 
Duryodhana and others; bhunksva, enjoy; a 
rajyam, kingdom; that is samrddham, propersous, 
free from enemies and obstacles. Ete, these; 
nihatah, have been definitely killed, made lifeless; 
eva maya, verily by Me; eva purvam, even earlier. 
Bhava, be you; nimitta-matram, merely an 
instrument, O Savyasachin. Arjuna was called so 
because he could shoot arrows even with his left 
hand. 
11.34 You destroy Drona and Bhisma, and 
Jayadratha and Karna as also the other heroic 
warriors who have been killed by Me. Do not be 
afraid. Fight! You shall conquer the enemies in 
battle. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.34 By saying, 'who have been killed by Me,' the 
Lord names Drona and those very warriors with 
regard to whom Arjuna had (his) doubts. Now 
then, uncertainty with regard to Drona and Bhisma 
is well-founded. Drona was the teacher of the 
science of archery, and was equipped with 
heavenly weapons; and particularly, he was his 
(Arjuna's) own teacher and most respected. Bhisma 
was destined to die at will, and possessed heavenly 
weapons. He fought a duel with Parasurama and 
remained unvanquished. So also Jayadratha-whose 
father was performing an austerity with the idea 
that anyone who made his son's head fall on the 
ground would have even his own head fall. Since 
Karna also was equipped with an unerring spear 
given by Indra, and was a son of the Sun, born of a 
maiden (Kunti), therefore he is referred to by his 
own name itself. As a mere instrument, tvam, you; 
jahi, destory them; who have been hatan, killed; 
maya, by Me. Ma, do not; vyathisthah, be afraid of 
them. Yuddhyasva, fight. Jetasi, you shall conquer; 
the sapatnan, enemies-Duryodhana and others; 
rane, in battle. 
11.35 Sanjaya said -- Hearing this utterance of 
Kesava, Kiriti (Arjuna), with joined palms and 
trembling, protrating himself, said again to Krsna 
with a faltering voice, bowing down overcome by 
fits of fear: 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.35 Srutva, hearing; etat, this, aforesaid; 
vacanam, utterance; kesavasya, of Kesava; Kiriti, 
krtanjalih, with joined palms; and vepamanah, 
trembling; nama-skrtva, prostrating himself; aha, 
said; bhuyah eva, again; krsnam, to Krsna; sa gadgadam, with a faltering voice-. A person's 
throat becomes choked with phlegm and his eyes 
full of tears when, on being struck with fear, he is 
overcome by sorrow, and when, on being 
overwhelmed with affection, he is filled with joy. 
The indistinctness and feebleness of sound in 
speech that follows as a result is what is called 
faltering (gadgada). A speech that is accompanied 
with (saha) this is sa-gadgadam. It is used 
adverbially to the act of utterance. Pranamya, 
bowing down with humility; bhita-bhitah, 
overcome by fits of fear, with his mind struck again 
and again with fear-this is to be connected with the 
remote word aha (said). At this juncture the words 
of Sanjaya have a purpose in view. How? It is thus: 
Thinking that the helpless Duryodhana will be as 
good as dead when the four unconquerable ones, 
viz Drona and others, are killed, Dhrtarastra, 
losing hope of victory, would conclude a treaty. 
From that will follow peace on either side. Under 
the influence of fate, Dhrtarastra did not even 
listen to that! 
11.36 Arjuna said -- It is proper, O Hrsikesa, that 
the world becomes delighted and attracted by Your 
praise; that the Raksasas, stricken with fear, run in 
all directions; and that all the groups of the 
Siddhas bow down (toYou). 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.36 Sthane, it is proper; -what is that?-that the 
jagat, world; prahrsyati, becomes delighted; tava 
prakirtya, by Your praise, by reciting Your 
greatness and hearing it. This is befitting. This is 
the idea. Or, the word sthane may be taken as 
qualifying the word 'subject' (understood) : It is 
proper that the Lord is the subject of joy etc. since 
the Lord is the Self of all beings and the Friend of 
all. So also it (the world) anurajyate, becomes 
attracted, becomes drawn (by that praise). That 
also is with regard to a proper subject. This is how 
it is to be explained. Further, that the raksamsi, 
Raksasas; bhitani, stricken with fear; dravanti, run; 
disah, in all directions-that also is with regard to a 
proper subject. And that sarve, all; the siddha sanghah, groups of the Siddhas-Kapila and others; 
namasyanti, bow down-that also is befitting. He 
points out the reason for the Lord's being the object 
of delight etc.: 
11.37 And why should they not bow down to You, 
O exalted [i.e. not narrow-minded.] One, who are 
greater (than all) and who are the first Creator even 
of Brahma! O infinite One, supreme God, Abode of 
the Universe, You are the Immutable,being and 
non-being, (and) that which is Transcendental. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.37 Ca, and; since You are the Primal Creator, the 
Cause, api, even; brahmanah, of Brahma, of 
Hiranyagarbha; therefore, kasmat, why, for what 
reason; should they na nameran, not bow down; te, 
to You; mahatman, O exalted One; gariyase, who 
are greater (than all)! Hence, why should these not 
bow down adi-karte, to the first Creator? Therefore 
You are fit for, i.e. the fit object of, delight etc. and 
salutation as well. Ananta, O infinite One; devesa, 
supreme God; jagannivasa, Abode of the Universe; 
tvam, You; are the aksaram, Immutable; tat param 
yat, that which is Transcendental, which is heard of 
in the Upanisads;-what is that?-sad-asat, being and 
nonbeing. Being is that which exists, and non-being 
is that with regard to which the idea of 
nonexistence arises. (You are) that Immutable of 
which these two-being and non-being-become the 
limiting adjuncts; which (Immutable), as a result, is 
metaphorically referred to as being and non-being. 
But in reality that Immutable is transcendental to 
being and non-being. 'That Immutable which the 
knowers of the Vedas declare' (8.11; cf. Ka. 1.2.15)-
that is You Yourself, nothing else. This is the idea. 
He praises again: 
11.38 You are the primal Deity, the ancient Person; 
You are the supreme Resort of this world. You are 
the knower as also the object of knowledge, and 
the supreme Abode. O You of infinite forms, the 
Universe is pervaded by You! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.38 You are the adi-devah, primal Deity, because 
of being the creator of the Universe; the puranah, 
ancient, eternal; purusah, Person-(derived) in the 
sense of 'staying in the town (pura) that is the 
body'. You verily are the param, suprem; 
nidhanam, Resort, in which this entire Universe 
comes to rest at the time of final dissolution etc. 
Besides, You are the vetta, knower of all things to 
be known. You are also the vedyam, object of 
knowledge-that which is fit to be known; and the 
param, supreme; dhama, Abode, the supreme State 
of Visnu. Anantarupa, O You of infinite forms, 
who have no limit to Your own forms; the entire 
visvam, Universe; tatam, is pervaded; tvaya, by 
You. Further, 
11.39 You are Air, Death, Fire, the god of the 
waters, the moon, the Lord of the creatures, and 
the Greater-grandfather. Salutations! Salutation be 
to You a thousand times; salutation to You again 
and again! Salutation! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.39 You are vayuh, Air; yamah, Death; and 
agnih, Fire; varunah, the god of the waters; 
sasankah, the moon; prajapatih, the Lord of the 
creatures- Kasyapa and others [See note on p.2.-
Tr.]; and pra-pitamahah, the Great-grandfather, i.e. 
the Father ever of Brahma (Hiranyagarbha). Namo, 
salutations; namah, salutation; astu, be; te, to You; 
sahasra-krtvah, a thousand times. Punah ca 
bhuyah api namo te, salutation to You again and 
again; namah, salutation! The suffix krtvasuc (after 
sahasra) indicates performance and repetition of 
the act of salutation a number of times. The words 
punah ca bhuyah api (again and again) indicate his 
own dissatisfaction [Dissatisfaction with only a few 
salutations.] owing to abundance of reverence and 
devotion. So also, 
11.40 Salutation to You in the East and behind. 
Salutation be to You on all sides in deed, O All! 
You are possessed of infinite strength and infinite 
heroism. You pervade everything; hence You are 
all! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.40 Namah, salutation to You; purastat, in the 
East; atha, and; even prsthatah, behind. Salutation 
be sarvatah, on all sides; eva, indeed; te, to You 
who exist everywhere; sarva, O All! Tvam, You; 
are ananta-virya-amita-vikramah, possessed of 
infinite strength and infinite heroism. virya is 
strength, and vikramah is heroism. Someone 
though possessing strength for the use of weapons 
etc. [Ast. reads 'satru-vadha-visaye, in the matter of 
killing an enemy'.-Tr.] may lack heroism or have 
little heroism. But You are possessed of infinite 
strength and infinite heroism. Samapnosi, You 
pervade, interpenetrate; sarvam, everything, the 
whole Universe, by Your single Self. Tatah, hence; 
asi, You are; sarvah, All, i.e., no entity exists 
without You. 'Since I am guilty of not knowing 
Your greatness, therefore,'- 
11.41 Without knowing this greatness of Yours, 
whatever was said by me (to You) rashly, through 
inadvertence or even out of intimacy, thinking 
(You to be) a friend, addressing (You) as 'O krsna,' 
'O Yadava,' 'O friend,' etc.-. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.41 Like a fool, ajanata, without knowing-. Not 
knowing what? In answer he says: idam, this; 
mahimanam, greatness-the Cosmic form; tava, of 
Yours, of God; yat, whatever; uktam, was said; 
maya, by me (to You); prasabham, rashly, 
slightingly; pramadat, through inadvertence, being 
in a distracted state of mind; va api, or even; 
pranayena, out of intimacy-itimacy is the 
familiarity arising out of love; whatever I have said 
because of that reason; erroneously matva, 
thinking (You); sakha iti, to be a friend, of the same 
age; iti, addressing You as, 'O Krsna,' 'O Yadava,' 
'O friend,'-. In the clause, 'tava idam mahimanam, 
ajanata, without knowing this greatness of Yours,' 
idam (this) (in the neutor gender) is connected with 
mahimanam (greatness) (in masculine gender) by a 
change of gender. If the reading be tava imam, 
then both the words would be in the same gender. 
11.42 And that You have been discourteously 
treated out of fun-while walking, while on a bed, 
while on a seat, while eating, in privacy, or, O 
Acyuta, even in public, for that I beg pardon of 
You, the incomprehensible One. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.42 And, yat, that; asi, You have been; asatkrtah, 
discourteously treated, slighted; avahasa-artham, 
out of fun, with a veiw to mocking;-where?-in 
these, Acyuta, viz vihara-sayya-asana-bhojanesu, 
while walking [Walking, i.e. sports or exercise], 
while on a bed, while on a seat, and while eating;-
that You have been insulted ekah, in privacy, in the 
absence of others; adhava, or; that You have been 
insulted api, even; tat-samaksam, in public, in the 
very presence of others-(-tat being used as an 
adverb); tat, for that, for all those offences; O 
Acyuta, aham, I; ksamaye, beg pardon; tvam, of 
You; aprameyam, the incomprehensible One, who 
are beyond the means of knowledge. (I beg Your 
pardon) because, 
11.43 You are the Father of all beings moving and 
non-moving; to this (world) You are worthy of 
worship, the Teacher, and greater (than a teacher). 
There is none equal to You; how at all can there be 
anyone greater even in all the three worlds, O You 
or unrivalled power? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.43 Asi, You are; pita, the Father, the Progenitor; 
lokasya, off all beings; cara-acarasya, moving and 
nonmoving. Not only are Yur are Father of this 
world, You are also pujyah, worthy of worship; 
since You are the guruh, Teacher; [He is the 
Teacher since He introduce the line of teachers of 
what is virtue and vice, and of the knowledge of 
the Self. And He is greater than a teacher because 
He is the teacher even of Hiranyagarbha and 
others.] gariyan, greater (than a teacher). How are 
You greater? In answer he says: Asti, there is; na, 
none other; tvat-samah, equal to You; for there is 
no possibility of two Gods. Because all dealings 
will come to naught if there be many Gods! When 
there is no possibility of another being equal 
toYou, kutah eva, how at all; can there be anyah, 
anyone; abhyadhikah, greater; api, even; loka traye, in all the three worlds; apratima-prabhavah, 
O you of unrivalled power? That by which 
something is measured is pratima. You who have 
no measure for Your power (prabhava) are a 
pratima-prabhavah. Apratima-prabhava means 'O 
You of limitless power!' Since this is so, 
11.44 Therefore, by bowing down and prostrating 
the body, I seek to propitate You who are God and
are adorable. O Lord, You should [The elision of a 
(in arhasi of priyayarhasi) is a metrical licence.] 
forgive (my faults) as would a father (the faults) of 
a son, as a friend, of a friend, and as a lover of a 
beloved. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.44 Tasmat, therefore; pranamya, by bowing 
down; and pranidhaya kayam, prostrating, laying, 
the body completely down; prasadaye, I seek to 
propitiate; tvam, You; who are isam, God, the 
Lord; and are idyam, adorable. Deva, O God; You 
are Your part, arhasi, should; sodhum, bear with, 
i.e. forgive (my faults); iva, as would; a pita, father; 
forgive all the faults putrasya, of a son; and as a 
sakha, friend; the fautls sakhyuh, of a friend; or as 
a priyah, lover; forgives the faults priyayah, of a 
beloved. 
11.45 I am delighted by seeing something not seen 
heretofore, and my mind is stricken with fear. O 
Lord, show me that very form; O supreme God, O 
Abode of the Universe, be gracious! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.45 Asmi, I am; hrsitah, delighted; drstva, by 
seeing; adrsta-purvam, something not seen 
heretofore-by seeing this Cosmic form of Yours 
which has never been seen before by me or others. 
And me, my; manah, mind; is pravyathitam, 
stricken; bhayena, with fear. Therefore, deva, O 
Lord; darsaya, show; me, to me; tat eva, that very; 
rupam, form, which is of my friend. Devesa, O 
supreme God; jagan-nivasa, Abode of the 
Universe; prasida, be gracious! 
11.46 I want to see You just as before, wearing a 
crown, wielding a mace, and holding a disc in 
hand. O You with thousand arms, O You of 
Cosmic form, appear with that very form with four 
hands. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.46 Aham, I; icchami, want; drastum, to see; 
tvam, You; kiritinam, wearing a crown; as also 
gadinam, wielding a mace; and cakra-hastam, 
holding a disc in hand; i.e., tatha eva, just as before. 
Since this is so, therefore, sahasra-baho, O You 
with a thousand arms-in Your present Cosmic 
form; visva-murte, O you of Cosmic form; bhava, 
apeear; tena eva rupena, with that very form-with 
the form of the son of Vasudeva; caturbhujena, 
with four hands. The idea is: withdrawing the 
Cosmic form, appear in that very form as the son of 
Vasudeva. Noticing Arjuna to have become afraid, 
and withdrawing the Cosmic form, reassuring him 
with sweet words 
11.47 The Blessed Lord said -- Out of grace, O 
Arjuna, this supreme, radiant, Cosmic, infinite, 
primeval form-which (form) of Mine has not been 
seen before by anyone other than you, has been 
shown to you by Me through the power of My own 
Yoga. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.47 Prasannena, out of grace-grace means the 
intention of favouring you; O Arjuna, idam, this; 
param, supreme; tejomayam, abundantly radiant; 
visvam, Cosmic, all-comprehensive; anantam, 
infinite, limitless; adyam, primeval-that which 
existed in the beginning; rupam, form, the Cosmic 
form; yat which form; me, of Mine; na drsta purvam, has not been seen before; tvat-anyena, by 
anyone other than you; daristam, has been shown; 
tava, to you; maya, by Me-who am racious, being 
possessed of that (intention of favouring you); 
atma-yogat, through the power of My own Yoga, 
through the power of My own Godhood. 'You have 
certainly got all your ends accomplished by the 
vision of the form of Mine who am the Self [The 
word atmanah (who am the Self) does not occur in 
some editions.-Tr.] .' Saying so, He eulogizes that 
(vision): 
11.48 Not by the study of the Vedas and sacrifices, 
not by gifts, not even by rituals, not by severe 
austerities can I, in this form, be perceived in the 
human world by anyone ['By anyone who has not 
received My grace'. other than you, O most valiant 
among the Kurus. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.48 Na veda-yajna-adhyayanaih, not by the study 
of the Vedas and sacrifices, (i.e.) not by the 
methodical study of even the four Vedas and the 
study of the sacrifices-since the study of the 
sacrifices is achieved by the very study of the 
Vedas, the separate mention of the study of 
sacrifices is for suggesting detailed knowledge of 
sacrifices; [This separate mention of the study of 
sacrifices is necessary because the ancients 
understood the study of Vedas to mean learing 
them by rote.] so also, na danaih, not by gifts-in 
such forms as distributing wealth equal to the 
weight of the giver; na ca kriyabhih, not even by 
rituals-by Vedic and other rituals like Agnihotra 
etc.; nor even ugraih tapobhih, by severe austerities 
such a Candrayana [A religious observance or 
expiatory penance regulated by the moon's phases. 
In it the daily quantity of food, which consists of 
fifteen mouthfuls at the full-moon, is curtailed by 
one mouthful during the dark fornight till it is 
reduced to nothing at the new moon; and it is 
increased in a like manner during the bright 
fortnight.-V.S.A.] etc. which are frightful; sakyah 
aham, can I; evam rupam, in this form-possessing 
the Cosmic form as was shown; drastum, be 
perceived; nrloke, in the human world; tvad anyena, by anyone other than you; kuru-pravira, O 
most valiant among the Kurus. 
11.49 May you have no fear, and may not there be 
bewilderment by seeing this form of Mine so 
terrible Becoming free from fear and gladdened in 
mind again, see this very earlier form of Mine. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.49 Ma te vyatha, may you have no fear; and ma 
vimudha-bhavah, may not there be bewilderment 
of the mind; drstva, by seeing, perceiving; idam, 
this rupam, form; mama, of Mine; idrk ghoram, so 
terrible, as was revealed. Vyapetabhih, becoming 
free from fear; and becoming prita-manah, 
gladdened in mind; punah, again; prapasya, see; 
idam, this; eva, very; tat, earlier; rupam, form; me, 
of Mine, with four hands, holding a conch, a discus 
and a mace, which is dear to you. 
11.50 Sanjaya said -- Thus, having spoken to 
Arjuna in that manner, Vasudeva showed His own 
form again. And He, the exalted One, reassured 
this terrified one by again becoming serene in 
form. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.50 Iti, thus; uktva, having spoken; arjunam, to 
Arjuna; tatha, in that manner, the words as stated 
above; Vasudeva darsayamasa, showed; svakam, 
His own; rupam, form, as was born in the house of 
Vasudeva; bhuyah, again. And the mahatma, 
exalted One; asvasayamasa, reassured; enam, this; 
bhitam, terrified one; bhutva, by becoming; punah, 
again; saumya-vapuh, serene in form, graceful in 
body. 
11.51 Arjuna said -- O Janardana, having seen this 
serene human form of Yours, I have now become 
calm in mind and restored to my own nature. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.51 O Janardana, drstva, having seen; idam, this; 
saumyam, serene; manusam, human; rupam, form; 
tava, of Yours-gracious, as of my friend; asmi, I 
have; idanim, now; samvrttah, become;-what?-
sacetah, calm in mind; and gatah, restored; 
prakrtim, to my own nature. 
11.52 The Blessed Lord said -- This form of Mine 
which you have seen is very difficult to see; even 
the gods are ever desirous of a vision of this form. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.52 Idam, this; rupam, form; mama, of Mine; yat, 
which; drstavan, asi, you have seen is; sudur darsam, very difficult to see. Api, even; the devah, 
gods; are nityam, ever; darsana-kanksinah, 
desirous of a vision; asya, of this; rupasya, form of 
Mine. The idea is that though they want to see, 
they have not seen in the way you have, nor will 
they see! Why so? 
11.53 Not through the Vedas, not by austerity, not 
by gifts, nor even by sacrifice can I be seen in this 
form as you have seen Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.53 Na vedaih, not through the Vedas, not even 
through the four Vedas-Rk, Yajus, Sama and 
Atharvan; na tapasa, not by austerity, not by severe 
austerities like the Candrayana; not danena, by 
gifts, by gifts of cattle, land, gold, etc.; na ca, nor 
even; ijyaya, by sacrifices or worship; sakyah 
aham, can I; drastum, be seen evamvidhah, in this 
form, in the manner as was shown; yatha, as; 
drstavan asi, you have seen mam, Me. 'How again, 
can You be seen? This is being answered: 
11.54 But, O Arjuna, by single-minded devotion am 
I-in this form-able to be known and seen in reality,
and also be entered into, O destroyer of foes. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.54 Tu, but, O Arjuna; bhaktya, by devotion-. Of 
what kind? To this the Lord says: Ananyaya, by 
(that devotion which is ) single-minded. That is 
called single-minded devotion which does not turn 
to anything else other than the Lord, and owing to 
which nothing else but Vasudeva is perceived by 
all the organs. With that devotion, aham sakyah, 
am I able; evamvidhah, in this form-in the aspect of 
the Cosmic form; jnatum, to to known-from the 
scriptures; not merely to be known from the 
scriptures, but also drastum, to be seen , to be 
realized directly; tattvena, in reality; and also 
pravestum, to be entered into-for attaining 
Liberation; parantapa, O destroyer of foes. Now 
the essential purport of the whole scripture, the 
Gita, which is meant for Liberation, is being stated 
by summing it up so that it may be practised: 
11.55 O son of Pandu, he who works for Me, 
accepts Me as the supreme Goal, is devoted to Me, 
is devoid of attachment and free from enmity 
towards all beings-he attains Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
11.55 Pandava, O son of Pandu; yah, he who; mat karma-krt, works for Me: work for Me is mat karma; one who does it is mat-karma-krt-. Mat paramah, who accepts Me as the supreme Goal: A 
servant does work for his master, but does not 
accept the master as his own supreme Goal to be 
attained after death; his one, however, who does 
work for Me, accepts Me alone as the supreme 
Goal. Thus he is matparamah-one to whom I am 
the supreme Goal-. So also he who is madbhaktah, 
devoted to me: He adores Me alone in all ways, 
with his whole being and full enthusiasm. Thus he 
is madbhaktah-. Sanga-varjitah, who is devoid of 
attachment for wealth, sons, friends, wife and 
relatives, Sanga means fondness, love; devoid of 
them-. Nirvairah, who is free from enmity; sarva bhutesu, towards all beings-berefit of the idea of 
enmity even towards those engaged in doing 
unmost harm to him-. Sah, he who is such a 
devotee of Mine; eti, attains; mam, Me. I alone am 
his supreme Goal; he does not attain any other 
goal. This is the advice for you, given by Me as 
desired by you. 
12.1 Arjuna said -- Those devotees who, being thus 
ever dedicated, meditate on You, and those again 
(who meditate) on the Immutable, the 
Unmanifested-of them, who are the best 
experiencers of yoga [(Here) yoga means samadhi, 
spiritual absorption.] ? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.1 The subject-matter stated in the immediately 
preceding verse, '...he who works for Me,' etc. is 
referred to by the word evam (thus). Ye bhaktah, 
those devotees who, seeking no other refuge; 
evam, thus; satata-yuktah, being ever-devoted, i.e., 
remaining unceasingly engaged in the works of the 
Lord, etc., intent on the aforesaid purpose; 
paryupasate, meditate; tvam, on You, in the 
Cosmic form as revealed earlier; ye ca api, and 
those others, again, who have renounced all 
desires, who have given up all actions; who 
meditate on Brahman as described (below), 
aksaram, on the Immutable; avyaktam, on the 
Unmanifested, which is so on account of being 
bereft of all limiting adjuncts, (and) which is 
beyond the comprehension of the organs-in the 
world, whatever comes within the range of the 
organs is said to be manifest, for the root anj 
conveys that sense; but this Immutable is the 
opposite of that and is endowed with qualifications 
that are spoken of by the great ones; those again, 
who meditate on that-; tesam, of them, among the 
two (groups); ke, who; are the yoga-vit-tamah, best 
experiencers of yoga, i.e., who are those that are 
surpassingly versed in yoga? But leave alone those 
who meditate on the Immutable, who are fully 
enlightened and are free from desires. Whatever 
has to be said with regard to them, we shall say 
later on. As for those others 
12.2 The Blessed Lord said -- Those who meditate 
on Me by fixing their minds on Me with steadfast 
devotion (and) being endowed with supreme faith they are considered to be the most perfect yogis 
according to Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.2 Ye, those who, being devotees; upasate, 
meditate; mam, on Me, the supreme Lord of all the 
masters of yoga, the Omniscient One whose vision 
is free from purblindness caused by such defects as 
attachment etc.; avesya,by fixing, concentrating; 
their manah, minds; mayi, on Me, on God in His
Cosmic form; nitya-yuktah, with steadfast 
devotion, by being ever-dedicated in accordance 
with the idea expressed in the last verse of the 
preceding chapter; and being upetah, endowed; 
paraya, with supreme; sraddhaya faith;-te, they; 
matah, are considered; to be yukta-tamah, most 
perfect yogis; me, according to Me, for they spend 
days and nights with their minds constantly fixed 
on Me. Therefore, it is proper to say with regard to 
them that they are the best yogis. 'Is it that the 
others do not become the best yogis?' No, but listen 
to what has to be said as regards them:' 
12.3 Those, however, who meditate in every way 
on the Immutable, the Indefinable, the Unmanifest, 
which is all-pervading, incomprehensible, change less, immovable and constant.-
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.3 Ye, those; tu, however; who, pari-upasate, 
meditate in every way; aksaram, on the Immutable; 
anirdesyam, the Indefinable-being unmanifest, It is 
beyond the range of words and hence cannot be 
defined; avyaktam, the Unmanifest-It is not 
comprehensible thrugh any means of knowledge-. 
Upasana, meditation, means approaching an object 
of meditation as presented by the scriptures, and 
making it an object of one's own thought and 
dwelling on it uniterruptedly for long by 
continuing the same current of thought with 
regard to it-like a line of pouring oil. This is what is 
called upasana. The Lord states the characteristics 
of the Immutable [Here Ast. adds 'upasyasya, 
which is the object of meditation'.-Tr.] : 
Sarvatragam, all-pervading, pervasive like space; 
and acintyam, incomprehensible-becuase of Its 
being unmanifest. For, whatever comes within the 
range of the organs can be thought of by the mind 
also. Being opposed to that, the Immutable is 
inconceivable. It is kutastham, changeless. Kuta 
means something apparently good, but evil inside. 
The word kuta (deceptive) is well known in the 
world in such phrases as, 'kuta-rupam, deceptive 
in appearance,' 'kuta-saksyam, false evidence', etc. 
Thus, kuta is that which, as ignorance etc., is the 
seed of many births, full of evil within, referred to 
by such words as maya, the undifferentiated, etc., 
and well known from such texts as, 'One should 
know Maya to be Nature, but the Lord of Maya to 
be the supreme God' (Sv. 4.10), 'The divine Maya of 
Mine is difficult to cross over' (7.14), etc. That 
which exists on that kuta as its controller (or 
witness) is the kuta-stha. Or, kutastha may mean 
that which exists like a heap [That is, motionless.].
Hence it is acalam, immovable. Since It is 
immovable, therefore It is dhruvam, constant, i.e. 
eternal. 
12.4 By fully controlling all the organs and always 
being even-minded, they, engaged in the welfare of 
all beings, attain Me alone. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.4 Samniyamya, by fully controlling, 
withdrawing; indriya-gramam, all the organs; and 
sarvatra, always at all times; sama-buddhayah, 
being even-minded-the even-minded are those 
whose minds remain equipoised in getting 
anything desirable or undesirable; te, they, those 
who are of this kind; ratah, engaged; sarva-bhuta hite, in the welfare of all beings prapnuvanti, 
attain; mam, Me; eva, alone. As regards them it 
needs no saying that they attain Me, for it has been 
said, '...but the man of Knowledge is the very Self. 
(This is) My opinion' (7.18). It is certainly not 
proper to speak of being or not being the best 
among the yogis with regard to those who have 
attained identity with the Lord. But, 
12.5 For them who have their minds attached to the 
Unmanifested the struggle is greater; for, the Goal 
which is the Unmanifest is attained with difficulty 
by the embodied ones. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.5 Tesam, for them; avyakta-asakta-cetasam, who 
have their minds attached to the Unmanifest; 
klesah,the struggle; is adhika-tarah, greater. 
Although the trouble is certainly great for those 
who are engaged in works etc. for Me, still owing 
to the need of giving up self-identification with the 
body, it is greater in the case of those who accept 
the Immutable as the Self and who kept in view the 
supreme Reality. Hi, for; avyakta gatih, the Goal 
which is the Unmanifest-(the goal) which stands in 
the form of the Immutable; that is avapyate, 
attained; duhkham, with difficulty; dehavadbhih, 
by the embodied ones, by those who identify 
themselves with the body. Hence the struggle is 
greater. We shall speak later of the conduct of 
those who meditate on the Unmanifest. 
12.6 As for those who, having dedicated all actions 
to Me and accepted Me as the supreme, meditate 
by thinking of Me with single-minded 
concentration only-. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.6 Tu, as for; ye, those who; sannyasya, having 
dedicated; sarvani, all; karmani, actions; mayi, to 
Me who am God; and matparah, having accepted 
Me as the supreme; upasate, meditate; dhyayantah, 
by thinking; mam, of Me; ananyena, with single minded; yogena, concentration; eva, only-. That 
(yoga) is single-minded which has no other object 
than the Cosmic Deity, the Self. By thinking 
exclusively with that single-minded [The Ast. and 
the A.A. read 'kena, what?' in place of 'kevalena, 
exclusively'.-Tr.] (yoga)-. What comes to them? 
12.7 O son of Prtha, for them who have their minds 
absorbed in Me, I become, without delay, the 
Deliverer from the sea of the world which is 
fraught with death. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.7 O son of Prtha, tesam, for them who are solely 
devoted to meditating on Me; avesita-cetasam 
mayi, who have their minds absorbed in, fixed on, 
merged in, Me who am the Cosmic Person; aham, 
I, God; bhavami, become; na cirat, without delay;-
what then? soon indeed-the samuddharta, 
Deliverer-. Wherefrom? In answer the Lord says, 
mrtyu-samsara-sagarat, from the sea of the world 
which is fraught with death. Samsara (world) 
fraught with mrtyu (death) is mrtyu-samsara. That 
itself is like a sea, being difficult to cross. I become 
their deliverer from that sea of transmigration 
which is fraught with death. Since this is so, 
therefore, 
12.8 Fix the mind on Me alone; in Me alone rest the 
intellect. There is no doubt that hereafter you will 
dwell in Me alone. [For the sake of metre, eva and 
atah (in the second line of the verse) are not joined 
together (to form evatah).] 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.8 Adhatsva, fix manah, the mind-possessed of 
the power of thinking and doubting; mayi, on Me, 
on God as the Cosmic Person; eva, alone. Mayi, in 
Me; eva, alone; nivesaya, rest; the buddhim, 
intellect, which engages in determining (things). 
Listen to what will happen to you thereby: Na 
samsayah, there is no doubt-no doubt should be 
entertained with regard to this; that atah urdhvam, 
hereafter, after the fall of the body; nivasisyasi, you 
will dwell; mayi, in Me, live in identity withMe; 
eva, alone. 
12.9 If, however, you are unable to establish the 
mind steadily on Me, then, O Dhananjaya, seek to 
attain Me through the Yoga of Practice. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.9 Atha, if, however; na saknosi, you are unable; 
samadhatum, to establish, in this way as I have 
described; cittam, the mind; sthiram, steadily, 
unwaveringly; mayi, on Me; tatah, then; O 
Dhananjaya, iccha, seek, pray; aptum, to attain; 
mam, Me, as the Cosmic person; abhyasa-yogena, 
through the Yoga of Practice. Practice consists in 
repeatedly fixing the mind on a single object by 
withdrawing it from everything else. The yoga 
following from this, and consisting in 
concentration of the mind, is abhyasa-yoga. 
12.10 If you are unable even to practise, be intent 
on works for Me. By undertaking works for Me as 
well, you will attain perfection. [Identity with 
Brahman.] 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.10 If asamarthah asi, you are unable; api, even; 
abhyase, to practise; then, bhava, be; mat-karma paramah, intent on works for Me-works (karma) 
meant for Me (mat) are mat-karma-i.e., you be such 
that works meant for Me become most important 
to you. In the absence of Practice, api, even; 
kurvan, by undertaking; karmani, works alone; 
madartham, for Me; avapsyasi, you will attain; 
siddhim, perfection-by gradually acquiring 
purification of mind, concentration and 
Knowledge. 
12.11 If you are unable to do even this, in that case, 
having resorted to the Yoga for Me, thereafter 
renounce the results of all works by becoming 
controlled in mind. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.11 Atha, if, again; asaktah asi, you are unable; 
kartum, to do; etat api, even this-what was stated 
as being 'intent on doing works for Me'; in that 
case, mad-yogam-asritah, having resorted to the 
Yoga for Me-the performance of those works that 
are being done by dedicating them to Me is
madyogah; by resorting to that Yoga for Me; tatah, 
thereafter; sarva-karma-phala-tyagam kuru, 
renounce, give up, the results of all works; by 
becoming yata-atmavan, controlled in mind. [In 
the earlier verse it was enjoined that all works, be 
they Vedic or secular, are to be considered as 
belonging to God and should be done for Him-not 
for oneself-, as a soldier would do for his king. In 
the present verse it is stated that the attitude 
should be, 'May this work of mine please God.' 
This very attitude involves dedicating of results to 
God. See S. According to M.S., mat-karma in the 
earlier verse means bhagavata-dharma, i.e. 
hearing, singing, etc. about God. In the present 
verse, sarva-karma means all works in general.-Tr.] 
Now the Lord praises the renunciation of the 
results of all works: 
12.12 Knowledge is surely superior to practice; 
meditation surpasses knowledge. The renunciation 
of the results of works (excels) meditation. From 
renunciation, Peace follows immediately. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.12 Jnanam, knowledge; [Firm conviction about 
the Self arrived at through Vedic texts and 
reasoning.] is hi, surely; sreyah, superior; -to 
what?-abhyasat, to practice [Practice-repeated 
effort to ascertain the true meaning of Vedic texts, 
in order to acquire knowledge.] which is not 
preceded by discrimination. Dhyanam, meditation, 
undertaken along with knowledge; visisyate, 
surpasses even jnanat, that knowledge. Karma phala-tyagah, renunciation of the results of works; 
excels even dhyanat, meditation associated with 
knowledge. ('Excels' has to be supplied.) Tyagat, 
from this renunciation of the results of actions, in 
the way described before; [By dedicating all actions 
to God with the idea, 'May God be pleased.'] 
santih, Peace, the cessation of transmigratory 
existence together with its cause; follows 
anantaram, immediately; not that it awaits another 
accasion. Should the unenlightened person 
engaged in works be unable to practise the 
disciplines enjoined earlier, then, for him has been 
enjoined renunciation of the results of all works as 
a means to Liberation. But this has not been done 
at the very beginning. And for this reason 
renunciation of the results of all works has been 
praised in, 'Knowledge is surely superior to 
practice,' etc. by teaching about the successive 
excellence. For it has been taught as being fit to be 
adopted by one in case he is unable to practise the 
disciplines already presented [Presented from 
verse 3 onwards.] Objection: From what similarly 
does the eulogy follow? Reply: In the verse, 'When 
all desires clinging to one's heart fall off' (Ka,2.3.14), 
it has been stated that Immortality results 
from the rejection of all desires. That is well 
known. And 'all desires' means the 'result of all 
rites and duties enjoined in the Vedas and Smrtis'. 
From the renunciation of these, Peace surely comes 
immediately to the enlightened man who is 
steadfast in Knowledge. There is a similarity 
between renunciation of all desires and 
renunciation of the results of actions by an 
unenlightened person. Hence, on account of that 
similarity this eulogy of renunciation of the results 
of all actions is meant for rousing interest. As for 
instance, by saying that the sea was drunk up by 
the Brahmana Agastya, the Brahmanas of the 
present day are also praised owing to the similarity 
of Brahminhood. In this way it was been said that 
Karma-yoga becomes a means for Liberation,since 
it involves renunciaton of the rewards of works. 
Here, again, the Yoga consisting in the 
concentration of mind on God as the Cosmic 
Person, as also the performance of actions etc. for 
God, have been spoken of by assuming a difference 
between God and Self. In, 'If you are unable to do 
even this' (11) since it has been hinted that it 
(Karma-yoga) is an effect of ignorance, therefore 
the Lord is pointing out that Karma-yoga is not 
suitable for the meditator on the Immutable, who 
is aware of idenity (of the Self with God). The Lord 
is similarly pointing out the impossibility of a 
karma-yogin's meditation on the Immutable. In 
(the verse), 'they...attain Me alone' (4), having 
declared that those who meditate on the 
Immutable are independent so far as the 
attainment of Liberation is concerned, the Lord has 
shown in, '...I become the Deliverer' (7), that others 
have no independence; they are dependent on 
God. For, if they (the former) be considered to have 
become identified with God, they would be the 
same as the Immutable on account of (their) having 
realized non-difference. Consequently, speaking of 
them as objects of the act of deliverance will 
become inappropriate! And, since the Lord in 
surely the greatest well-wisher of Arjuna, He 
imparts instructions only about Karma-yoga, 
which involves perception of duality and is not 
associated with full Illumination. Also, no one who 
has realized his Self as God through valid means of 
knowledge would like subordination to another, 
since it involves a contradiction. Therefore, with 
the idea, 'I shall speak of the group of virtues (as 
stated in), "He hwo is not hateful towards any 
creature," etc. which are the direct means to 
Immortality, to those monks who meditate on the 
Immutable,who are steadfast in full enlightenment 
and have given up all desires,' the Lord proceeds: 
12.13 He who is not hateful towards any creature, 
who is friendly and compassionate, who has no 
idea of 'mine' and the idea of egoism, who is the 
same under sorrow and happiness, who is 
forgiving; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.13 Advesta, he who is not hateful; sarva bhutanam, towards any creature: He does not feel 
repulsion for anything, even for what may be the 
cause of sorrow to himself, for he sees all beings as 
his own Self. Maitrah, he who is friendly-behaving 
like a friend; karunah eva ca, and compassionate: 
karuna is kindness, compassion towards sorrow stricken creatures; one possessing that is karunah, 
i.e. a monk, who grants safety to all creatures. 
Nirmamah, he who has no idea of 'mine'; 
nirahankarah, who has no idea of egoism; sama duhkha-sukhah, who is the same under sorrow 
and happiness, he in whom sorrow and happiness 
do not arouse any repulsion or attraction; ksami, 
who is forgiving, who remains unperturbed even 
when abused or assaulted; 
12.14 He who is ever content, who is a yogi, who 
has self-control, who has firm conviction, who has 
dedicated his mind and intellect to Me-he who is 
such a devotee of Mine is dear to Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.14 Santustah satatam, he who is ever content: 
who has the sense of contentment irrespective of 
getting or not getting what is needed for the 
maintenance of the body; who is similarly ever satisfied whether he gets or not a good thing. Yogi, 
who is a yogi, a man of concentrated mind; yata atma, who has self-control, whose body and organs 
are under control; drdha-niscayah, who has firm 
conviction-with regard to the reality of the Self; 
arpita-mano-buddhih, who has dedicated his mind 
and intellect; mayi, to Me-(i.e.) a monk whose 
mind (having hte characteristics of reflection) and 
intellect (possessed of the faculty of taking 
decisions) are dedicated to, fixed on, Me alone; sah 
yah, he who is; such a modbhaktah, devotee of 
Mine; is priyah, dear; me, to Me. It was hinted in 
the Seventh Chapter, 'For I am very much dear to 
the man of Knowledge, and he too is dear to Me' 
(7.17). That is being elaborated here. 
12.15 He, too, owing to whom the world is not 
disturbed, and who is not disturbed by the world, 
who is free from joy, impatience, fear and anxiety, 
is dear to Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.15 Sah ca, he too; yasmat, owing to whom 
owing to which monk; lokah, the world; na 
udvijate, is not disturbed, not afflicted, not 
agitated; so also, yah na udvijate, he who is not 
disturbed; lokat, by the world; muktah, who is free; 
harsa-amarsa-bhaya-udvegaih, from joy, 
impatience, fear and anxiety;-harsa is elation of the 
mind on acquiring a thing dear to oneself, and is 
manifested as horripillation, shedding of tears, etc.; 
amarsa is non-forbearance; bhaya is fright; udvega 
is distress; he who is free from them-, is priyah, 
dear; me, to Me. 
12.16 He who has no desires, who is pure, who is 
dextrous, who is impartial, who is free from fear, 
who has renounced every undertaking-he who is 
(such) a devotee of Mine is dear to Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.16 Anapeksah, he who has no desires with 
regard to covetable things like body, organs, 
objects, (their inter-) relationship, etc.; sucih, who is 
pure, endowed with external and internal purity; 
daksah, who is dextrous, who is able to promptly 
understand in the right way the duties that present 
themselves; udasinah, who is impartial, the monk 
who does not side with anybody-friends and 
others; gatavyathah, who is free from fear; sarva arambha-parityagi, who has renounced every 
undertaking-works under-taken are arambhah; 
sarva-arambhah means works undertaken out of 
desire for results to be enjoyed here or hereafter; he 
who is apt to give them up (pari-tyaga) is sarva arambha-parityahi; he who is such a madbhaktah, 
devotee of Mine; he is priyah, dear; me, to Me. 
Further, 
12.17 He who does not rejoice, does not fret, does 
not lament, does not hanker; who gives up good 
and bad, who is filled with devotion-he is dear to 
Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.17 Yah, he who; na hrsyati, does not rejoice on 
getting a coveted object; na dvesti, does not fret on 
getting an undesirable object; na socati, does not 
lament on the loss of a dear one; and na kanksati, 
does not hanker after an object not acquired; 
subha-asubha-parityogi, who gives up good and 
bad, who is apt to give up good and bad actions; 
bhaktiman, who is full of devotion-he is dear to 
Me. 
12.18 He who is the same towards friend and foe, 
and so also in honour and dishonour; who is the 
same under cold, heat, happiness and sorrow, who 
is free from attachment to everything. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.18 Samah, who is the same; satrau ca mitre, 
towards friend and foe; ca tatha, and so also; mana apamanayoh, in honour and dishonour, in 
adoration and humiliation; who is the same sita usna-sukha-duhkhesu, under cold, heat, happiness 
and sorrow; and sanga-vivar-jitah, free from 
attachment to everything; Moreover, 
12.19 The person to whom denunciation and praise 
are the same, who is silent, content with anything, 
homeless, steady-minded, and full of devotion is 
dear to Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.19 Narah, the person; tulya-ninda-stutih, to 
whom denunciation and praise are the same; 
mauni, who is silent, restrained in speech; 
santustah, content; yena-kenacit, with anything-for 
the mere maintenance of the body, as has been said 
in, 'The gods know him to be a Brahmana who is 
clad by anyone whosoever' (Mbh. Sa. 245.12); 
further, aniketah, he who is homeless, who has no 
fixed place of residence-'without a home' [ The 
whole verse is 'He,however is certainly the knower 
of Liberation who has attachment neither for a hut, 
nor for water, nor cloth, nor the three places of 
pilgrimage, nor a home, nor a seat, nor food.'], as 
said in another Smrti; sthira-matih, steady-minded, 
whose thought is steady with regard to the Reality 
which is the supreme Goal; and bhaktiman, who is 
full of devotion-(he) is dear to Me. [There is a 
repeated mention of Bhakti in this Chapter because 
it is means to the Knowledge which leads to the 
supreme Goal.] The group of qualities of the 
monks who meditate on the Immutable, who have 
renounced all desires, who are steadfast in the 
knowledge of the supreme Goal-which (qualities) 
are under discussion beginning from 'He who is 
not hateful towards any creature' (13), is being 
concluded: 
12.20 But [Tu (but) is used to distinguish those who 
have attained the highest Goal from the aspirants.-
Tr.] those devotees who accept Me as the supreme 
Goal, and with faith seek for this ambrosia [M.S.'s 
reading is dharmamrtam-nectar in the form of 
virtue. Virtue is called nectar because it leads to 
Immortality, or because it is sweet like nectar.] 
which is indistinguishable from the virtues as 
stated above, they are very dear to Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
12.20 Tu, but; ye bhaktah, those devotees of Mine, 
the monks who have resorted to the highest 
devotion consisting in the knowledge of the 
supreme Reality; mat-paramah, who accept Me as 
the supreme Goal, to whom I, as mentioned above, 
who am identical with the Immutable, am the 
highest (parama), unsurpassable Goal; and 
sraddadhanah, with faith; paryupasate, seek for, 
practise; idam, this; dharmyamrtam, ambrosia that 
is indistinguishable from the virtues-that which is 
indistinguishable from dharma (virtue) is 
dharmya, and this is called amrta (ambrosia) since 
it leads to Immortality-; yatha-uktam, as stated 
above in, 'He who is not hateful towards any 
creature,' etc.; te, they; are ativa, very; priyah, dear; 
me, to Me. After having explained what was hinted 
in, 'For I am very much dear to the man of 
Knowledge...'(7.17), that has been concluded here 
in, 'Those devotees are very dear to Me.' Since by 
seeking for this ambrosia which is 
indistinguishable from the virtues as stated above 
one becomes very dear to Me, who am theLord 
Vishnu, the supreme God, therefore this nectar 
which is indistinguishable from the virtues has to 
be diligently sought for by one who is a seeker of 
Liberation, who wants to attain the coveted Abode 
of Visnu. This is the purport of the sentence. [Thus, 
after the consummation of meditation on the 
qualified Brahman, one who aspires after the 
unqualified Brahman, who has the qualifications 
mentioned in, 'He who is not hateful towards any 
creature,' etc., who is pre-eminently fit for this 
purpose, and who practises sravana etc. has the 
possibility of realizing the Truth from which his 
Liberation logically follows. Hence, the conclusion 
is that the meaning of the word tat (in the sentence 
tattvamasi) has to be sought for, since his has the 
power to arouse the comprehension of the 
meaning of that sentence, which is the means to 
Liberation.] 
13.1 Swami Gambhirananda has not translated this 
sloka. Many editions of the Bhagavadgita do not 
contain this sloka, including the commentary by 
Sankaracharya. If this sloka is included, the total 
number of slokas in the Bhagavadgita is 701. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.1 Sri Sankaracharya did not comment on this 
sloka. Many editions of the Bhagavadgita do not 
contain this sloka. If this sloka is included, the 
total number of slokas in the Bhagavadgita is 701.
(This is the case in this edition you are reading). 
13.2 The Blessed Lord said -- O son of Kunti, this 
body is referred to as the 'field'. Those who are 
versed in this call him who is conscious of it as the 
'knower of the field'. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.2 The Lord specifies the body as the object 
referred to by the pronoun idam (this). O son of 
Kunti, (this body) abhidhiyate, is referred to; 
ksetram iti, as the field-because it is protected (tra) 
against injury (ksata), or because it perishes (ksi), 
wastes away (ksar), or because the results of 
actions get fulfilled in the body as in a field 
(ksetra). The word iti is used in the sense of 'as'. 
They-who?-tadvidah, who are versed in this, who 
know the 'field' and the 'knower of the field'; ahuh, 
call; tam, him, the knower; yah, who; vetti etat, is 
concious of, knows, it, the body, the field-makes it, 
from head to foot, an abject of his knowledge; 
makes it an object of perception as a separate 
entity, through knowledg which is spontaneous or 
is acquired through instruction; ksetrajna iti, as the 
knower of the field. As before, the word iti is used 
in the sense of 'as'. They call him as the knower of 
the field. Is it that the field and the knower of the 
field thus mentioned are to be understood through 
this much knowledge only? The answer is, no. 
13.3 And, O scion of the Bharata dynasty, under stand Me to be the 'Knower of the field' in all the 
fields. In My opinion, that is Knowledge which is 
the knowlege of th field and the knower of the 
field. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.3 Ca api, and; viddhi, understand; mam, Me, the 
supreme God who is transcendental; to be the 
ksetrajnam, 'Knower of the field' with the 
characterisitics noted above; sarva-ksetresu, in all 
the fields. The idea is this: Know the 'Knower of 
the field'- who has become diversified by limiting 
adjuncts in the form of numerous 'fields' ranging 
from Brahma to a clump of grass-as free from 
differentiations resulting from all the limiting 
adjuncts, and as beyond the range of such words 
and ideas as existece, nonexistence, etc. O scion of 
the Bharata dynasty, since there remains nothing to 
be known apart from the true nature of the field, 
the knower of the field and God, therefore; tat, 
that; is jnanam, Knowledge, right knowledge; yat, 
which; is the jnanam, knowledge; ksetra ksetrajnayoh, of the field and the knower of the 
field-which are the two knowables-, and by which 
Knowledge the field and the knower of the field 
are made objects of knowledge. This is mama, My, 
God Vishu's; matam, opinion. Objection: Well, if it 
be that in all the field there exists God alone, and 
none else other than Him, as the enjoyer, then God 
will become a mundane being; or, due to the 
absence of any mundane creature other than God, 
there will arise the contingency of the negation of 
mundance existence. And both these are 
undesirable, since the scriptures dealing with 
bondage, Liberation and their causes will become 
useless, and also becuase they contradict such valid 
means of knowledge as direct perception. In the 
first place, mundane existence which is 
characterized by happiness, sorrow and their cause 
is apprehended through direct perception. Besides, 
from the perception of variety in the world it can 
be inferred that mundane existence results from 
virtue and vice. All this becomes illogical if God 
and the individual soul be one. Reply: No, because 
this becomes justifiable owing to the difference 
between Knowledge and ignorance. 'These two, viz 
that which is know as Knowledge and that which 
is known as ignorance are widely contradictory, 
and they follow divergent courses' (Ka. 1.2.4.); and 
similarly, the different results, viz Liberation and 
enjoyment, belonging (respectively) to those 
Knowledge and ignorance, have also been pointed 
out to be contrary by saying that Liberation is the 
goal of Knowledge, and enjoyment is the result of 
ignorance (see Ka. 1.2.2). Vyasa, also has said so: 
'Now, there are these two paths' (Mbh Sa. 241.6) 
etc. and, 'There are only these two paths,' etc. Here 
(in the Gita) also, two kinds of steadfastness have 
been stated. And it is understood from the Vedas, 
the Smrtis and reason that ignorance together with 
its effects has to be destroyed by Knowledge. As 
for the Vedic texts, they are: 'If one has realized 
here, then there is truth; if he has not realized here, 
then there is great destruction' (Ke. 2.5); 'Knowing 
Him in this way, one becomes Immortal here' (Nr. 
Pu. 6); 'There is no other path to go by' (Sv. 3.8); 
'The enlightened man is not afraid of anything' 
(Tai. 2.9.1). On the other hand, (the texts) with 
regard to the unenlightened person are: 'Then, he is 
smitten with fear' (Tai. 2.7.1); 'Living in the midst 
of ognorance' (Ka. 1.2.5); One who knows Brahman 
becomes Brahman indeed. In his line is not born 
anyone who does not know Brahman' (Mu. 3.2.9); 
'(While he who worships another god thinking,) 
"He is one, and I am another," does not know. He is 
like an animal to the gods' (Br. 1.4.10). He who is a 
knower of the Self, 'He becomes all this (Universe)' 
(Br. 1.4.10); 'When men will fold up space like 
(folding) leather, (then) there will be cessation of 
sorrow, without knowing the Deity' (Sv. 6.9). There 
are thousands of texts like these. And the Smrti 
texts (from the Gita) are: 'Knowledge remains 
covered by ignorance. Thereby the creatures 
become deluded' (5.15); 'Here itself is rebirth 
conquered by them whose minds are established 
on sameness' (5.19); 'Since by seeing equally the 
God who is present alike everywhere (he does not 
injure the Self by the Self, therefore he attains the 
supreme Goal)' (13.28), etc. And as for reason, there 
is the text, 'Men avoid snakes, tips of kusa-grass as 
also well when they are aware of them. Some fall 
into them owing to ignorance. Thus, see the special 
result arising from knowledge' (Mbh. Sa. 201.17). 
Similarly, it is known that an unelightened person, 
who identifies himself with the body etc. and who 
practises righteousness and unrighteousness under 
the impulsion of attachment and aversion, takes 
birth and dies. It cannot be reasonably denied by 
anyone that, those who see the Self as different 
from the body etc. become liberated as a result of 
the cessation of righteous and unrighteous 
conduct, which depends on the destruction of 
attachment and aversion. The being so, the Knower 
of the field, who is reality is God Himself, appears 
to have become a mundane soul owing to the 
various adjuncts which are products of ignorance; 
as for instance the individual soul becomes 
identified with the body etc. For it is a well-known 
fact in the case of all creatures that their self identify with the body etc. which are not-Self is 
definitely caused by ignorance. Just as, when a 
stump, of a tree is firmly regarded as a man, the 
qualities of a man do not thereby come to exist in 
the stump, nor do the qualities of the stump come 
to the person, similarly the property 
ofconsciousness does not come to the body, nor 
those of the body to consciousness. It is not proper 
that the Self should be identified with happiness, 
sorrow, delusion, etc., since they, like decrepitude 
and death, are equally the products of ignorance. 
Objection: May it not be said that this is not so, 
becuase of dissimilarity? The stump and the man, 
which are verily objects of perception, are 
superimposed on each other through ignorance by 
their perceiver. On the other hand, in the case of 
the body and the Self,, the mutual superimposition 
occurs verily between a knower and an object of 
perception. Thus, the illustration is not equally 
applicable. Therefore, may it not be that the 
properties of the body, though objects of 
knowledge, belong to the Self which is the knower? 
Reply: No, since there arises the contingency of 
(the Self) becoming devoid of consciousness! If 
qualities such as happiness, sorrow, delusion, 
desire, etc. of the body etc., which are the field and 
are objects of knowledge, indeed belong to the 
knower, then it will be necessary to explain the 
particular reason why some of the qualities of the 
object of knowledge-the field-superimposed 
through ignorance belong to the Self, while 
decrepitude, death, etc. do not. (On the contrary) it 
is possible to infer that they (happiness etc.) do not 
pertain to the Self, since, like decrepitude etc., they 
are superimposed on the Self through ignorance, 
and because they are either avoidable or 
acceptable. This being so, the mundane state, 
consisting of agentship and enjoyership pertaining 
to the objects of knowledge, is superimposed on 
the knower through ignorance. Hence, nothing of 
the knower is affected thereby-in the same way as 
nothing of the sky is affected by the 
superimposition of surface, diret, etc. (on it) by 
fools. Such being the case, not the least touch of the 
mundane state is to be apprehended with regard to 
the almighty [see footnote on p.5, and p.168.] God, 
the Knower of the field, even though He exists in 
all the fields. For it is nowhere seen in the world 
that anybody is benefitted or harmed by a quality 
attributed to him through ignorance. As for the 
statement that the illustration is not equally 
applicable-that is wrong. Objection: How? Reply: 
Because what is intended as common between the 
illustration and the thing illustrated is merely the 
superimposition through ignorance. There is no 
disagreement as to that. However, as for your 
contention that the illustration fails with regard to 
the Knower, that too has been shown to be inapt by 
citing the example of decrepitude etc. [If it be held 
that objects of experience may be superimposed on 
one another, but they cannot be superimposed on 
the experiencer, the answer is that this cannot be a 
universal proposition. For decrepitude and death, 
which are matters of experience, are superimposed 
on the Self, the experiencer.] Objection: May it not 
be that the Knower of the field becomes a 
mundane being owing to his having ignorance? 
Reply: No, because ignorance is of the nature of 
tamas. Since ignorance has the nature of covering, 
it is indeed a notion born of tamas; it makes one 
perceive contrarily, or it arouses doubt, or it leads 
to non-perception. For it disappears with the dawn 
of discrimination. And the three kind of ignorance, 
viz non-perception etc. [Etc: false perception and 
doubt.], are experienced when there are such 
defects as blindness etc. which are forms of tamas 
and have the nature of veiling. [It is known 
through the process of agreement and difference 
that false perception etc. arise from some 
defects,and they are not the qualities of the Self.] 
Objection: Here it is asserted that if this be the case, 
then ignorance is a quality of the knower? Reply: 
No, for the defects such as blindness are seen to 
belong to the eye which is an organ. As for your 
notion that 'ignorance is a quality of the 
experiencer, and the very fact of being possessed of 
the quality of ignorance is what constitutes the 
mundane state of the Knower of the field; the 
assertion which was made (by the Vedantin) in 
that connection, "that the Knower of th field is God 
Himself and not a mundane being, " is improper,'-
this is not so. As for example: Since such defects as 
false perception etc. are seen to belong to the organ 
eye, therefore false perception etc. or their causes, 
viz defects like blindness etc., do not belong to the 
perceiver. Just as blindness of the eyes does not 
pertain to the perceiver since on being curved 
through treatment it is not seen in the perceiver, 
similarly notions like non-perception, false
perception, doubt, and their causes should, in all 
cases, pertain to some organ; not to the perceiver, 
the Knower of the field. And since they are objects 
of perception, they are not qualities of the Knower 
in the same way that light is of a lamp. Just because 
they are objects of perception, they are cognized as 
different from one's own Self. Besides, it is denied 
by all schools of thought that in Liberation, when 
all the organs depart, there is any association with 
such defects as ignorance etc. If they (the defects) 
be the qualities of the Self Itself, the Knower of the 
field, as heat is of fire, then there can never be a 
dissociation from them. Again, since there can be 
no association with or dissociation from anything 
for the immutable, formless Self which is all pervading like space, therefore it is established that 
the Knower of the field is ever identical with God. 
This follows alos from the utternance of the Lord, 
'Being without beginning and without qualities' 
(31), etc. Objection: Well, if this be so, then, owing 
to the nonexistence of the world and the mundane 
creatures, there will arise the defect of the 
uselessness of the scriptures, etc. Reply: No, since 
this (defect) is admitted by all. A defect that is 
admitted by all who believe in the Self is not to be 
explained by one alone! Objection: How has this 
been admitted by all? Reply: People of all schools 
of thought who believe in the Self admit that there 
is no worldly behaviour or the behaviour of a 
worldling in the liberated ones. Yet, in their case 
(i.e. in those various schools), it is not admitted 
that there is any possibility of such a defect as the 
scriptures becoming useless, etc. Similarly, in our 
case let the scriptures be useless when the knowers 
of the field become identified with God; and 
purposeful within the sphere of ignorance. This is 
just as in the case of all the dualists, where it is 
admitted that the scriptures etc. become useful in 
the state of bondage, not in the state of Liberation. 
Objection: Well, for us all dualists, bondage and 
Liberation of the Self are real in the truest sense. So, 
when things to be renounced or accepted as also 
the means thereto are real, the scriptures etc. 
become meaningful. On the other hand, may it not 
be that for the non-dualists, since duality deos not 
exist in truest sense, it being the creation of 
ignorance, therefore the state of bondage of the Self 
is not ultimately real, and hence the scriptures etc. 
become purposeless as they remain shorn of a 
subject-matter? Reply: No, since it is not logical 
that the Self should have different states. If this 
were possible at all, then the states of bondage and 
freedom of the Self should be simultaneous, or 
successive. As to that, they cannot occur 
simultaneously, since they are contradictory-like 
rest and motion in the same object. Should they 
occur successively and without being caused, then 
there will arise the contingency of there being no 
Liberation; if they occur through some cause, then, 
since they do not exist inherently, there arises the 
contingency of their being ultimately unreal. In this 
case also the assumption becomes falsified. 
Moreover, when ascertaining the precedence and 
succession of the states of bondage and Liberation, 
the state of bondage will have to be considered as 
being the earlier and having no beginning, but an 
end. And that is contrary to valid means of 
knowledge. Similarly it will have to be admitted 
that the state of Liberation has a beginning, but no 
end- which is certainly opposed to valid means of 
knowledge. And it is not possible to established 
eternality for something that has states nd 
undergoes a change from one state to another. On 
the other hand, if for avoiding the defect of non eternality the different states of bondage and 
Liberation be not assumed, then, even for the 
dualists such defects as the purposelessness of the 
scriptures become certainly unavoidable. Thus, the 
situation being similar (for both), it is not for the 
Advaitin (alone) to refute the objection. Nor do the 
scriptures become purposeless, because the 
scriptures are applicable to the commonly known 
unenlightened person. It is indeed in the case of the 
ignorant person-not in the case of the enlightened 
one-that there occurs the perception of identity of 
the Self with the effect (i.e. enjoyership) and the 
cause (i.e. agentship) which are not-Self. For, in the 
case of the enlightened persons, it is impossible 
that, after the dawn of the realization of non identity of the Self with effect and cause, they can 
have Self identification with these as 'I'. Surely, not 
even a downright fool, or a lunatic and such others, 
see water and fire or shade and light as identical; 
what to speak of a discriminating person! 
Therefore, such being the case, the scriptures 
dealing with injunction and prohibition do not 
concern a person who sees the distinction of the 
Self from effect and cause. For, when Devadatta is 
ordered to do som work with the words, 'You do 
this,' Visnumitra who happens to be there does not, 
even on hearing the command, conclude, 'I have 
been ordered.' But this conclusion is reasonable 
when the person for whom the order is meant is 
not understood. So also with regard to cause and 
effect. Objection: Can it not be that, even after 
having realized the Self as different from effect and 
cuase, it is quite reasonable from the standpoint of 
natural relationship, [Natural relationship-Self identification with the body through ignorance.] 
that with regard to the scriptures one should have 
the understanding, 'I am enjoined to adotp the 
means that yields a desired result, and am 
porhibited from adopting the means that leads to 
an undesirable result'? As for instance, in the case 
of a father and son, or between others, even though 
there exists the awareness of the distinction 
between each other, still there is the 
comprehension of the implication of the 
injunctions and prohibitions meant for one as 
being also meant for the other. [In the (Br. (1.5.17) 
we read, 'Now therefore the entrusting: When a 
man thinks he will die, he says to his son, "You are 
Brahman, you are the sacrifice, and you are the 
world,"' etc. It has been enjoined here in this 
manner that the son should accept as his own all 
the duties thus entrusted to him by the father. 
Similarly, it is understood that when a son in 
unable to perform his own duties, the father has to 
accept them. So also in the case of brothers and 
others. Thus, in the case of the enlightened person 
also, though there is a comprehension of his own 
distinction from effect and cause, still, owing to his 
earlier relationship with ignorance, body, etc., 
there is no contradiction in his understanding that 
the injunctions and prohibitions are meant for 
him.] Reply: No, since identification of the Self 
with effect and cause is possible only before 
attaining the knowledge of the Self as distinct 
(from them). It is only after one has followed (or 
eschewed) what is enjoined or prohibited by the 
scriptures that he comprehends his own distinction 
from the effect and cause; not before. [In B.S. 
(3.4.26-7) it is said that the merit earned by the 
performance of scriptural duties helps to generate 
knowledge of Brahman. Therefore these duties are 
not meant for the enlightened. (By following what 
is enjoined, and avoiding what is prohibited, one's 
mind becomes purified, and then only one 
understands he is different from cause and effect agentship and enjoyership.-Tr.)] Therefore it is 
established that the scriptures dealing with 
injunctions and prohibitions are meant for the 
ignorant. Objection: Well, if (injunctions and 
prohibitions) such as, 'One who desires heaven 
shall perform sacrifices', 'One should not eat 
poisoned meat,' etc. be not observed by those who 
have realized the Self as distinct and by those who 
view only the body as the Self, then, from the 
absence of any observer of those (injunctions etc.) 
there would follow the uselessness of the 
scriptures. Reply: No, because engagement in or 
abstention from actions follows from what is 
ordained by the scriptures. As for one who has 
realized the identity of the Lord and the knower of 
the field, one who has realized Brahman-he does 
not engage in action. Similarly, even the person 
who does not believe in the Self does not engage in 
action, under the idea that the other world does not 
exist. However, one who has inferred the existence 
of the Self on the ground of the wellknown fact 
that study of the scriptures dealing with 
injunctions and prohibitions becomes otherwise 
purposeless, who has no knowledge of the 
essential nature of the Self, and in whom has arisen 
hankering for the results of actions-he faithfully 
engages in action. This is a matter of direct 
perception to all to us. Hence, the scriptures are not 
purposeless. Objection: May it not be that the 
scriptures will become meaningless when, by 
noticing abstention from action in the case of men 
with discrimination, their followers too will 
abstain? Reply: No, because discrimination arises 
in some rare person only. For, as at present, some 
rare one among many people comes to possess 
discrimination. Besides, fools do not follow one 
who has discrimination, because (their) 
engagement in action is impelled by defects such 
as attachment etc. And they are seen to get 
engaged in such acts as black magic. Moreover, 
engagement in action is natural. Verily has it been 
said (by the Lord), 'But it is Nature that acts' (5.14). 
Therefore, the mundane state consists of nothing 
but ignorance, and is an object of perception (to the 
ignorant man who sees it) just as it appears to him. 
Ignorance and its effects do not belong to the 
Knower of the feild, the Absolute. Moreover, false 
knowledge cannot taint the supreme Reality. For, 
water in a mirage cannot taint the supreme Reality. 
For, water in a mirage cannot make a desert 
muddy with its moisture. Similarly, ignorance 
cannot act in any way on the Knower of the field. 
Hence has this been said, 'And understand Me to 
be knower of the field,' as also, 'Knowledge 
remains covered by ignorance' (5.15). Objection: 
Then, what is this that even the learned say like the 
worldly people, 'Thus [Possessed of aristorcracy 
etc.] am I,' 'This [Body, wife, etc.] verily belongs to 
Me'? Reply: Listen. This is that learnedness which 
consists in seeing the field as the Self! On the 
contrary, should they realize the unchanging 
Knower of the field, then they will not crave for 
enjoyment or action with the idea, 'May this be 
mine.' Enjoyment and action are mere perversions. 
This being so, the ignorant man engages in action 
owing to his desire for results. On the other hand, 
in the case of an enlightened person who has 
realized the changeless Self, engagement in aciton 
in impossible because of the absence of desire for 
results. Hence, when the activities of the aggregate 
of body and organs cease, his withdrawal from 
action is spoken of in a figurative sense. Some may 
have this other kind of learnedness: 'The Knower 
of the field is God Himself; and the field is 
something different and an object of knowledge to 
the Knower of the field. But I am a mundane being, 
happy and sorrowful. And it is my duty to bring 
about the cessation of worldly existence through 
the knowledge of the field and the Knower of the 
field, and by continuing to dwell in His true nature 
after directly perceiving through meditation God, 
the Knower of the field,' and he who, understands 
thus, and he who teaches that 'he (the taught) is not 
the Knower of the field,' and he who, being under 
such an idea, thinks, 'I shall render meaningful the 
scriptures dealing with the worldly state and 
Liberation'-is the meanest among the learned. That 
Self-immolator, being devoid of any link with the 
traditional interpreters of the purport of the 
scriptures, misinterprets what is enjoined in the 
scriptures and imagines what is not spoken there, 
and thereby himself becoming deluded, befools 
others too. Hence, one who is not a knower of the 
traditional interpretation is to be ignored like a 
fool, though he may be versed in all the scriptures. 
As for the objection that, if God be one with the 
knower of the field, He will then become a 
mundane being, and that, if the knowers of the 
fields are one with God, then from the 
nonexistence of mundane beings will follow the 
absence of the mundane state, -these two objections 
have been refuted by admitting Knowledge and 
ignorance as having different characteristics. 
Objection: How? Reply: By saying that any defect 
imagined through ignorance does not affect the 
supreme Reality which is the substratum of that 
(imagination). In accordance with this an 
illustration was cited that a desert is not made 
muddy by water in a mirage. Even the defect of the 
possibility of nonexistence of the mundange state, 
consequent on the nonexistence of individual 
souls, stands refuted by the explanation that the 
mundane state and the individual souls are 
imagined through ignorance. Objection: The defect 
of mundane existence in the knower of the field 
consists in his being possessed of ignorance. And 
sorrowfulness etc. which are its products are 
matters of direct experience. Reply: No, since 
whatever is known is an attribute of the field, 
therefore the knower-the knower of the field cannot reasonably be tainted by the defects arising 
from it. Whatsoever blemish-not existing in the 
knower of the field-you attribute to It is logically 
an object of experience, and hence it is verily a 
quality of the field; not the quality of the knower of 
the field. Nor does the knower of the field become 
tainted thereby, because of knower cannot possibly 
have any conjunction with an object of knowledge. 
Should there be a conjunction, then there will be no 
possibility at all of its (the latter's) becoming a 
knowable. Oh! Sir, if being ignorant, sorrowful, etc. 
be qualities of the Self, how is it that they are 
directly perceived? Or how can they be qualities of 
the Knower of the field? If the conclusion be that 
all that is known consititutes the field, and that the 
one who knows is verily the knower of the field, 
then, to say that being ignorant, sorrowful, etc.are 
the qualities of the knower of the field and that 
they are directly perceived is a contradictory 
statement having only ignorance as its basis. Here, 
(the opponent) asks: To whom does ignorance 
belong? (The answer is that) it belongs verily to 
him by whom it is experienced! Objection: In 
whom is it perceived? Reply: Here the answer is: It 
is pointless to ask, 'In whom is ignorance 
experienced?' Objection: How? Reply: If ignorance 
be perceived (by you), then you perceive its 
possessor as well. Moreover, when that possessor 
of ignorance is perceived it is not reasonable to ask, 
'In whom is it perceived?' For, when an owner of 
cattle is seen, the question, 'To whom do the cattle
belong', does not become meaningful. Objection: 
Well, is not the illustration dissimilar? Since, the 
cattle and their owner are directly perceived, their 
relation also is directly perceived. Hence the 
question is meaningless. Ignorance and its 
possessor are not directly perceived in that 
manner, in which case the question would have 
been meaningless. Reply: What will it matter to 
you if you know the relation of ignorance with a 
person who is not directly perceived as possessed 
of ignorance? Opponent: Since ignorance is a 
source of evil, therefore it should be got rid of. 
Reply: He to whom ignorance belongs will get rid 
of it! Opponent: Indeed, ignorance belongs to 
myself. Reply: In that case, you know ignorance as 
also yourself who possess it? Opponent: I know, 
but not through direct perception. Reply: If you 
know through inference, then how is the 
connection (between yourself and ignorance) 
known? Surely it is not possible for you the 
knower to have at that time ['When you are 
knowing your own ignorance.'] the knowledge of 
the relation (of the Self) with ignorance which is an 
object of knowledge; ['After having perceived 
ignorance as an object of your knowledge, how can 
you who continue to be the knower cognize 
yourself as the knower of that ignorance? For this 
would lead to the contradiction of the same person 
becoming the subject and the object of cognition.'] 
because the cognizer is then engaged in cognizing 
ignorance as an object. Besides, there cannot be 
someone who is a (separate) cognizer of the 
relation between the knower and ignorance, and a 
separate cognition of that (relation), for this would 
lead to infinite regress. If the knower and the 
relation between the knower and the thing known 
be cognizable, then a separate cognizer has to be 
imagined. Of him, again, another knower has to be 
imagined; of him again a separate cognizer would 
have to be imagined! Thus, an infinite regress be 
comes unavoidable. Again, whether the knowable 
be ignorance or anything else, a knowable is verily 
a knowable; similarly, even a knower is surely a 
knower; he does not become a knowable. And 
when this is so, [Since the knower cannot be 
known, therefore his relation with ignorance also 
cannot be known by himself or by anybody else] 
nothing of the cognizer-the knower of the field-is 
tainted by such defects as ignorance, 
sorrowfulness, etc. Objection: May it not be said 
that the (Self's) defect is surely this, that the field, 
which is full of defects, is cognized (by It)? Reply: 
No, because it is the Immutable, which is 
consciousness, by nature, that is figuratively 
spoken of as the cognizer. It is just like figuratively 
attributing the act of heating to fire merely because 
of its (natural) heat. Just as it has been shown here 
by the Lord Himself that identification with action,
cause and effect are absent in the Self, and that 
action, cause, etc. are figuratively attributed to the 
Self owing to their having been superimposed (on 
It) through ignorance, so has it been shown by Him 
in various places: 'He who thinks of this One as the 
killer...' (2.19), 'While actions are being done in ever 
way by the gunas of Nature' (3.27), 'The 
Omnipresent neither accepts anybody's sin...' 
(5.15), etc. It has been explained by us, too, in that 
very way, and in the following contexts also we 
shall explain accordingly. Objection: Well, in that 
case, if identification with action, cause and effect 
be naturally absent in the Self, and it they be 
superimpositions through ignorance, then it 
amounts to this that actions are meant for being 
undertaken only by the ignorant, not by the 
enlightened. Reply: It is true that is comes to this. 
This very fact we shall explain under the verse, 
'Since it is not possible for one who holds on to a 
body...' (18.11). And, in the context dealing with 
the conclusion of the purport of the whole 
Scripture, we shall explain this elaborately under 
the verse, '...in brief indeed, O son of Kunti,...which 
is the supreme consummation of Knowledge' (ibid. 
50) It is needless here to expatiate further, Hence 
we conclude. The next verse, '(Hear about)...what 
that field is,' etc., summarizing the purport of the 
chapter dealing with the 'field' taught in the verses 
begining from 'This body...'etc., is being presented. 
For it is proper to introduce briefly the subject matter that is sought to be explained. 
13.4 Hear from Me in brief about (all) that as to 
what that field is and how it is; what its changes 
are, and from what cause arises what effect; and 
who He is, and what His powers are. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.4 Srnu, hear, i.e., having heard, understand; me, 
from Me, from My utterance; samasena, in brief; 
about (all) tat, that-the true nature of the field and 
the Knower of the field, as they have been 
described; as to yat, what; tat, that-tat stands for 
that which has been indicated as 'This body' (in 
verse 1); ksetram, field is, which has been referred 
to as 'this'; ca, and; yadrk, how it is along with its 
own qualities; yadvikari, what its changes are; ca, 
and; yatah, from what cause; arises yat, what effect 
(-arises is understood-); sah ca yah, and who He, 
the Knower of the field indicated above, is; ca, and; 
yat-prabhavah, what His powers are. Yat probhavah is He who is possessed of the powers 
arising from the adjuncts. The word ca has been 
used (throughout) in the sense of and. For making 
the intellect of the hearer interested the Lord 
praises that true nature of the field and the Knower 
of the field which is intended to be taught: 
13.5 It has been sung of in various ways by the 
Rsis, separately by the different kinds [The 
different branches of Vedic texts.] of Vedic texts, 
and also by the rational and convicing sentences 
themselves which are indicatvie of and lead of 
Brahman. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.5 Gitam, It has been sung of, spoken of; 
bahudha, in various ways; rsibhih, by the Rsis, by 
Vasistha and others; sung prthak, separately; 
vividhaih, by the different kinds of; chandobhih, 
Vedic texts-chandas mean the Rg-veda etc; by 
them; ca, and; besides, hetumadbhih, by the 
rational; and viniscitaih, by the convincing, i.e. by 
those which are productive of certain knowledge not by those which are in an ambiguous form; 
brahma-sutra-padaih eva, sentences themselves 
which are indicative of and lead to Brahman. 
Brahma-sutras are the sentences indicative of 
Brahman. They are called padani since Brahman is 
reached, known, through them. By them indeed 
has been sung the true nature of the field and the 
Knower of the field (-this is understood). The Self 
is verily known through such sentences as, 'The 
Self alone is to be meditated upon' (Br. 1.4.7), 
which are indicative of and lead to Brahman. To 
Arjuna who had become interested as a result of 
the eulogy, the Lord says: 
13.6 The great elements, egoism, intellect and the 
Unmanifest itself; the ten organs and the one, and 
the five objects of the senses; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.6 Mahabhutani, the great elements: Those 
elements which are great owing to their pervasion 
of all midifications, and which are subtle. As for 
the gross elements, they will be spoken of by the 
word indriya-gocarah, objects of the senses. 
Ahankarah, egoism, which is the source of the 
great elements and consists of the idea of 'I'. 
Buddhih, intellect, the source of egoism and 
consisting of the faculty of judgement; ca, and; its 
cause, the avyaktam eva, Unmanifest itself, the 
Undifferentiated, the power of God spoken of in, 
'Maya of Mine...difficult to cross' (7.14). The word 
eva (itself) is used for singling out Prakrti (Nature). 
The Prakrti divided eightfold [The undifferentiated 
(avyakta), mahat, egoism and the five 
uncompunded subtle elements] is this much alone. 
The word ca (and) is used for joining the various 
categories. The dasa, ten; indriyani, organs : The 
five, organs ear etc., which are called sense-organs 
since they produce perception, and the (other) five 
organs-organ of speech, hands, etc.-which are 
called motor-organs since they accomplish actions. 
They are ten. Ekam ca, and the one-which is that?-
the mind, the eleventh, possessed of the power of 
thinking etc. (see fn. on p. 173). Ca, and; the panca, 
five; indriya-gacarah, objects of the senses-such 
objects as sound etc. The followers of the Sankhya 
call these which are such the twenty-four 
categories. Thereafter, the Lord now says that even 
those qualities which the Vaisesikas speak of as the 
attributes of the sould are certainly the attributes of 
the field, but not of the Knower of the field: 
13.7 Desire, repulsion, happiness, sorrow, the 
aggregate (of body and organs), sentience, 
fortitude- this field, together with its modifications, 
has been spoken of briefly. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.7 Iccha, desire: Having experienced again an 
object of that kind which had given him the feeling 
of pleasure earlier, a man wants to have it under 
the idea that it is a source of pleasure. That is this 
desire which is an attribute of the internal organ, 
and is the 'field' since it is an object of knowledge. 
So also dvesah, repulsion: Having experienced 
again an object of that kind which he had earlier 
felt as a cause of sorrow, he hates it. That is this 
repulsion, and it is surely the 'field' since it is an 
object of knowledge. Similarly, sukham, 
happiness- which is favourable, tranquil, having 
the quality of sattva-is the 'field' since it is an object 
of knowledge. Duhkham, sorrow-which is by 
nature adverse-, that, too, is the 'field' since it is a 
knowable. Sanghatah is the aggregate, the 
combination, of body and organs. Cetana, 
sentience, is a state of the internal organ, manifest 
in that aggregate like fire in a heated lump of iron, 
and pervaded by an essence in the form of a 
semblance of Consciousness of the Self. That too is 
the 'field' because it is an object of knowledge. 
Dhrtih, fortitude, by which are sustained the body 
and organs when they get exhausted-that too is the 
'field' becuase it is an object of knowledge. Desire 
etc. have been selected as suggestive of all the 
qualities of the internal organ. The Lord concludes 
what has been said: Etat, this; ksetram, field; 
savikaram, together with its modifications 
beginning from mahat (buddhi); has been 
samasena, briefly; udahrtam, spoken of. That 'field' 
which was referred to as, 'This body is called the 
field' (1), and is constituted by the aggregate of the 
constituents of the field has been explained in its 
different forms beginning from the great elements 
etc. ending with fortitude. The Knower of the field 
whose qualities are going to be described, and by 
realizing which Knower of the field along with His 
majesty Immortality follows-of Him, togehter with 
His attributes, the Lord Himself will narrate in the 
verse, 'I shall speak of that which is to be known' 
(12). But, for the present, the Lord enjoins the 
group of disciplines characterized as humility etc. 
which lead one to the knowledge of That (Knower 
of the field)-that group of humility etc. which are 
referred to by the word Knowledge since they lead 
to Knowledge, and owing to the existence of which 
one becomes appropriately competent for the 
realization of that Knowable, and being endued 
with which a monk is said to be steadfast in 
Knowledge: 
13.8 Humility, unpretentiousness, non-injury, for bearance, sincerity, service of the teacher, 
cleanliness, steadiness, control of body and organs; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.8 Amanitvam, humility-the quality of a vain 
person is manitvam, boasting about oneself; the 
absence of that is amanitvam. Adambhitvam, 
unpretentiousness- proclaming one's own virtues 
is dambhitvam; the absence of that is 
adambhitvam. Ahimsa, non-injury, absence of 
cruely towards creatures; ksantih, for-bearance, 
remaining undisturbed when offened by others; 
arjavam, sincerity, uprightness, absence of 
crookedness; acarya-upasanam, service of the 
teacher, attending on the teacher who instructs in 
the disciplines for Liberation, through acts of 
service etc.; saucam, cleanliness-washing away the 
dirt from the body with earth and water, and 
internally, removing the 'dirt' of the mind such as 
attachment etc. by thinking of their opposites; 
sthairyam, steadiness, perseverance in the path to 
Liberation alone; atma-vinigrahah, control of the 
aggregate of body and organs which is referred to 
by the word 'self', but which is inimical to the Self; 
restricting only to the right path that (aggregate) 
which naturally strays away in all directions. 
Further, 
13.9 Non-attachment with regard to objects of the 
senses, and also absence of egotism; seeing the evil 
in birth, death, old age, diseases and miseries; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.9 Vairagyam, non-attachment, the attitude of 
dispassion; indriya-arthesu, with regard to objects 
of the senses, viz sound etc., with regard to seen or 
unseen objects of enjoyment; eva ca, and also; 
anahankarah, absence of egotism, absence of pride; 
janma-mrtyu-jara-vyadhi-duhkha-dosa anudarsanam, seeing the evil in birth, death, old 
age, diseases and miseries-seeing the evil in each 
one of them from 'birth' to 'miseries'. The evil in 
birth consists in lying in the womb and coming out 
of it; seeing, i.e. thinking, of it. Similarly, thinking 
of the evil in death; so also, seeing in old age the 
evil in the form of deprivation of intelligence, 
strength and vigour, and becoming an object of 
contempt. In the same way, thinking of the evil in 
diseases like headtache etc.; so also with regard to 
miseries arising from causes physical, natural and 
supernatural. Or, duhkha-dosa may mean the 
miseries themselves which are evil. Seeing, as 
before, that (evil in the form of miseries) in birth 
etc.-birth is miserable, death is miserable, old age is 
miserable, diseases are miserable. Birth etc. are 
miserable because they cause misery; not that they 
are miseries in themselves. [Birth etc. are 
perceivable events, and as such are not miseries in 
themselves.] Thus, when one thinks of the evil in 
the form of miseries in birth etc. dispassion arises 
with regard to the pleasures in the body, organs 
and objects. From that follows the tendency of the 
organs towards the indwelling Self for the 
realization of the Self. The seeing of the evil in the 
form of misery in birth etc. is called Knowledge 
because it thus becomes a cuase of the rise of 
Knowledge. Moreover, 
13.10 Non-attachment and absence of fondness 
with regard to sons, wives, homes, etc., and 
constant equanimity of the mind with regard to the 
attainment of the desirable and the undesirable; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.10 Asaktih, non-attachment-attachment means 
merely the kind for things arising from association; 
the absence of that is asaktih; and anabhisvangah, 
absence of fondness-abhisvangah, is in fact a 
special kind of attachment consisting of the idea of 
self-identification; as for instance, thinking 'I 
myself am happy,' or, 'I am sorrowful,' when 
somebody else is happy or unhappy, and thinking 
'I live', or, 'I shall die,' when some- body else lives 
or dies-With regard to what? In answer the Lord 
says: putra-dara-grhadisu, with regard to sons, 
wives, homes, etc. From the use of 'etc.' (it is 
understood that this fondness is) even with regard 
to others who are liked very much-retinue of 
sevants and so on. And since both these (absence of 
attachment and fondness) lead to Knowledge, 
therefore they are called Knowledge. And nityam, 
constant; sama-cittatvam, equanimity of mind, 
mental equipoise;-with regard to what?-ista-anista upapattisu, the attainment of the desirable and the 
undesirable; mental equipoise with regard to them, 
always, without exception. One does not become 
happy on the attainment of the desirable, nor does 
he become angry on the attainment of the 
undesirable. And that constant equanimity of mind 
which is of this kind is Knowledge Further, 
13.11 And unwavering devotion to Me with single minded concentration; inclination to repair into a 
clean place; lack of delight in a crowd of people; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.11 Ca, and; avyabhicarini, unwavering-not 
having any tendency to deviate; bhaktih, devotion; 
mayi, to Me, to God; ananya-yogena, with single minded concentration, with undivided 
concentration-ananyayogah is the decisive, 
unswerving conviction of this kind: 'There is none 
superior to Lord Vasudeva, and hence He alone is 
our Goal'; adoration with that. That too is 
Knowledge. Vivikta-desa-sevitvam, inclination to 
repair into a clean place-a place (desa) naturally 
free (vivikta) or made free from impurity etc. and 
snakes, tigers, etc.; or, place made solitary (vivikta) 
by being situated in a forest, on a bank of a river, or 
in a temple; one who is inclined to seek such a 
place is vivikta-desa-sevi, and the abstract form of 
that is vivikta-desa-sevitvam. Since the mind 
becomes calm in places that are indeed pure (or 
solitary), therefore meditation on the Self etc. 
occurs in pure (or solitary) places. Hence the 
inclination to retire into clean (or solitary) places is 
called Knowledge. Aratih, lack of delight, not 
being happy; jana-samadi, in crowd of people-an 
assemblage, a multitude of people without culture, 
lacking in purity and immodest-, (but) not (so) in a 
gathering of pure and modest persons since that is 
conducive to Knowledge. Hence, lack of delight in 
an assembly of common people is Knowledge since 
it leads to Knowledge. Besides, 
13.12 Steadfastness in the knowledge of the Self, 
contemplation on the Goal of the knowledge of 
Reality-this is spoken of as Knowledge. Ignorance 
is that which is other than this. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.12 Adhyatma-jnana-nityatvam, steadfastness in 
the knowledge of the Self: adhyatma-jnanam is the 
knowledge of the Self, etc.; constant dwelling in 
that is nityatvam. Tattva-jnanartha-darsanam, 
contemplating on the Goal of the knowledge of 
Reality: Tattva-jnanam is that (realization of Truth) 
which arises from the fruition of application to the 
disciplines like humility etc. which are the means 
to knowledge. Its Goal (artha) is Liberation, the 
cessation of mundane existence. Contemplation 
(darsana) on that is tattva-jnana-artha-darsanam. 
For, when one engages in contemplation on the 
result of the knowledge of Reality, one gets the 
urge to undertake the disciplines which are its 
means. Etat, this-those that have been stated from 
'humility' etc. to 'contemplation on the Goal of the 
knowledge of Reality'; proktam, is spoken of; iti, 
as; jnanam, Knowledge, because they are meant to 
lead one to Knowledge. Ajnanam, ignorance; is yat, 
that which is; anyatha, other; atah, than this-what 
has been stated above. Contrarily, arrogance, 
pretentiousness, cruelty, revenge, insincerity, etc. 
are to be known as ignorance so that, since they are 
the cause of the origination of worldly existence, 
they can be avoided. To the question as to what is 
to be known through the aforesaid Knowledge, the 
Lord says, 'I shall speak of that which is to be 
known,' etc. Objection: Do not humility etc. 
constitute yama and niyama [See fn. on p. 239.-
Tr.]? The Knowable is not known through them. 
For humility etc. are not seen to determine the 
nature of anything. Moreover, everywhere it is 
observed that whatever knowledge reveals its own 
object, that itself ascertains the nature of that object 
of knowledge (the knowable). Indeed, nothing else 
is known through a knowledge concerning some 
other object. As for instance, fire is not known 
through the knowledge of a pot. Reply: This is not 
a defect, for we have said that they are called 
'Knowledge' because they lead one to Knowledge, 
and because they are auxiliary causes of 
Knowledge. 
13.13 I shall speak of that which is to be known, by 
realizing which one attains Immortality. The 
supreme Brahman is without any beginning. That 
is called neither being nor non-being. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.13 Pravaksyami, I shall speak of, fully describe 
just as it is; tat, that; yat, which; is jenyam, to be 
known. In order to interest the hearer through 
inducement, the Lord speaks of what its result is: 
Jnatva, by realizing; yat, which Knowable; asnute, 
one attains; amrtam, Immortality, i.e.; he does not 
die again. Anadimat, without beginning-one 
having a beginning (adi) is adimat; one not having 
a beginning is anadimat. What is that? The param, 
supreme, unsurpassable; brahma, Brahman, which 
is under discussion as the Knowable. Here, some 
split up the phrase anadimatparam as anadi and 
matparam because, if the word anadimat is taken 
as a Bahuvrihi compound, ['That which has no (a), 
beginning (adi) is anadi.' Matup is used to denote 
possession. Since the idea of possession is a already 
implied in anadi, therefore matup, if added after it, 
becomes redundant.] then the suffix mat (matup) 
becomes redundant, which is undesirable. And 
they show a distintive meaning: (Brahman is anadi, 
beginningless, and is) matparam, that of which I 
am the supreme (para) power called Vasudeva. 
Trully, the redundance could be avoided in this 
way if that meanig were possible. But that meaning 
is not possible, because what is intended is to make 
Brahman known only through a negation of all 
attributes by saying, 'It is called neither being nor 
non-being.' It is contradictory to show a possession 
of a distinctive power and to negate attributes. 
Therefore, although matup and a bahuvrihi 
compound convey the same meaning of 
'possession', its (matup's) use is for completing the 
verse. [The Commentator accepts anadimat as a 
nan-tatpurusa compund. If, however, the 
Bahuvrihi is insisted on, then the mat after anadi 
should be taken as completing the number of 
syllables needed for versification. So, nat need not 
be compounded with param.] Having aroused an 
interest through inducement by saying, 'The 
Knowable which has Immortality as its result is 
beeing spoken of by Me,' the Lord says: Tat, that 
Knowable; ucyate, is called; na sat, neither being; 
nor is it called asat, non-being. Objection: After 
strongly girding up the loins and declaring with a 
loud voice, 'I shall speak of the Knowable,' is it not 
incongruous to say, 'That is called neither being 
nor non-being'? Reply: No. What has been said is 
surely consistent. Objection: How? Reply: For in all 
the Upanisads, the Knowable, i.e. Brahman, has 
been indicated only by negation of all attributes-
'Not this, not this' (Br. 4.4.22), 'Not gross, not 
subtle' (op. cit. 3.3.8), etc.; but not as 'That is this', 
for It is beyond speech. Objection: Is it not that a 
thing which cannot be expressed by the word 
'being' does not exist? Like-wise, if the Knowable 
cannot be expressed by the word 'being', It does 
not exist. And it is contradictory to say, 'It is the 
Knowable', and 'It cannot be expressed by the 
word "being".' Counter-objection: As to that, no 
that It does not exist, because It is not the object of 
the idea, 'It is non-being.' Objection: Do not all 
cognitions verily involve the idea of being or non being? This being so, the Knowable should either 
be an object of a cognition involving the idea of 
existence, or it should be an object of a cognition 
involving the idea of non-existence. Reply: No, 
because, by virtue of Its being super-sensuous, It is 
not an object of cognition involving either, of the 
two ideas. Indeed, any object perceivable by the 
senses, such as pot etc., can be either an object of 
cognition involving the idea of existence, or it can 
be an object of cognition involving the idea of non existence. But this Knowable, being supersensuous 
and known from the scriptures, which are the sole 
means of (Its) knowledge, is not, like pot etc., an 
object of cognition involving either of the two 
ideas. Therefore It is called neither being nor non being. As for your objection that it is contradictory 
to say, 'It is the Knowable, but it is neither called 
being nor non-being,'-it is not contradictory; for the 
Upanisad says, 'That (Brahman) is surely different 
from the known and, again, It is above the 
unknown' (Ke. 1.4). Objection: May it not be that 
even the Upanisad is contradictory in its meaning? 
May it not be (contradictory) as it is when, after 
beginning with the topic of a shed for a sacrifice, 
[Cf. 'Pracinavamsam karoti, he constructs (i.e. shall 
construct) (the sacrificial shed) with its supporting 
beam turned east-ward' (Tai, Sam.; also see 
Sanskrit-English Dictionary, Monier Williams).-Tr.] 
it is said, 'Who indeed knows whether there exists 
anything in the other world or not!' (Tai. Sam.6.1.1)? 
Reply: No, since the Upanisad speaking of 
something that is different from the known and the 
unknown is meant for establishing an entity that 
must be realized. [The Upanisadic text is not to be 
rejected on the ground that it is paradoxical, for it 
is meant to present Brahman as indentical with 
one's own inmost Self.] But, '...whether there exists 
anything in the other world,' etc. is merely an 
arthavada [See note on p. 40. Here, the passage, 
'...whether there exists...,' etc. is to be interpreted as 
an arthavada emphasizing, the need of raising a 
shed, irrespective of any other consideration.-Tr.] 
connected with an injunction. From reason who it 
follows that Brahman cannot be expressed by such 
words as being, non-being, etc. For, every word 
used for expressing an object, when heard by 
listeners, makes them understand its meaning 
through the comprehension of its significance with 
the help of genus, action, quality and relation; not 
in any other way, because that is not a matter of 
experience. To illustrate this: a cow, or a horse, etc. 
(is comprehended) through genus; cooking or 
reading, through action; white or black, through 
quality; a rich person or an owner of cows, through 
relation. But Brahman does not belong to any 
genus. Hence it is not expressible by words like 
'being' etc.; neither is It possessed of any qualitity 
with the help of which It could be expressed 
through qualifying words, for It is free from 
qualities; nor can It be expressed by a word 
implying action, It being free from actions-which 
accords with the Upanisadic text, 'Partless, 
actionless, calm' (Sv. 6.19). Nor has It any relation, 
since It is one, non-dual, not an object of the senses, 
and It is the Self. Therefore it is logical that It 
cannot be expressed by any word. And this follows 
from such Upanisadic texts as, 'From which, words 
trun back' (Tai. 2.4.1), etc. Therefore it is logical that 
It cannot be expressed by any word. And this 
follows from such Upanisadic texts as, 'From 
which, words turn back' (Tai. 2.4.1), etc. Since the 
Knowable (Brahman) is not an object of the word 
or thought of 'being', there arises the apprehension 
of Its nonexistence. Hence, for dispelling that 
apprehension by establishing Its existence with the 
help of the adjuncts in the form of the organs of all 
creatures, the Lord says: 
13.14 That (Knowable), which has hands and feet 
everwhere, which has eyes, heads and mouths 
everywhere, which has ears everywhere, exists in 
creatures by pervading them all. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.14 Tat, That-the Knowable; sarvatah-pani padam, which has hands and feet everywhere-. 
The existence of the Knower of the field is revealed 
through th adjuncts in the form of the organs of all 
creatures. And the Knower of the field is spoken of 
as such because of the limiting adjuncts of the field. 
The field, too, is diversely differentiated as hands, 
feet, etc. All diversity in the Knower of the field, 
caused by the differences in the adjunct-the field-, 
is certainly unreal. Hence, by denying it, the nature 
of the Knowable has been stated, in, 'That is called 
neither being nor non-being.' Although the unreal 
form is caused by the limiting adjuncts, still, for the 
comprehension of Its existence it is said, '(It) has 
hands and feet everywhere, etc., by assuming this 
as a quality of the Knowable. Thus, as is well 
known, there is saying of the people versed in 
tradition, 'The Transcendental is described with the 
help of superimposition and its refutation'. 
Everywhere the hands, feet, etc., which are 
perceived as limbs of all bodies, perform, their 
duties due to the presence of the power of the 
Knowable (Brahman). Thus the grounds for the 
inference of the existence of the Knowable are 
metaphorically spoken of as belonging to the 
Knowable. The others have to be explained 
similarly. That Knowable has hands and feet 
everwhere. That which has eyes, heads, and 
mouths everywhere is sarvatoksi-siro-mukham. 
That which has ears every-where is sarvatah-
srutimat: sruti means the organs of hearing; that 
which has it is sruti-mat. Tisthati, It exists, remains 
established; loke, in the multititude of creatures; 
avrtya, by pervading; sarvam, them all. With this 
purpose is view, that as a result of the 
superimposition of the organs like hands, feet, etc., 
which are adjuncts, there may not be the 
misconception that the Knowable is possessed of 
them (adjuncts), the (next) verse is begun: 
13.15 Shining through the functions of all the 
organs, (yet) devoid of all the organs; unattached, 
and verily the supporter of all; without quality, 
and the perceiver of qualities; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.15 Sarvendriya-guna-abhasam, shining through 
the functions of all the organs: By the use of the 
words all the organs are understood ears etc., 
known as the sense-organs and motor-organs, as 
also the internal organs-the intellect and the mind, 
for they are equally the limiting adjuncts of the 
Knowable. Besides, the organs of hearing etc. 
become the limiting adjuncts from the very fact of 
the internal organ becoming so. Hence, the 
Knowable gets expressed through determination, 
thinking, hearing, speaking, etc. that are the 
functions of all the organs, internal and external, 
which are the limiting adjuncts. In this way, It is 
manifest through the functions of all the organs. 
The idea is that, that Knowable appears to be as 
though active owing to the functions of all the 
organs, as it is said in the Upanisadic text, 'It 
thinks, as it were, and shakes, as it were' (Br. 4.3.7). 
For that reason, again, is It not perceived as being 
actually active? In answer the Lord says: It is sarva indriya-varitam, devoid of all the organs, i.e. bereft 
of all the instruments of action. Hence the 
Knowable is not active through the functioning of 
the instruments of action. As for the Upanisadic 
verse, 'Without hands and feet He moves swiftly 
and grasps; without eyes He sees, without ears He 
hears' (Sv. 3.19), etc.-that is meant for showing that 
that Knowable has the power of adapting Itself to 
the functions of all the organs which are Its 
limiting adjuncts; but it is not meant to show that It 
really has such activity as moving fast etc. The 
meaning of that verse is like that of the Vedic text, 
'The blind one discoverd a gem' (Tai, Ar. 1.11). 
[This is an artha-veda (see note on p.530), which is 
not to be taken literally but interpreted in 
accordance with the context.] Since the Knowable 
is devoid of all the instruments of actions, therefore 
It is asaktam, unattached, devoid of all 
associations. Although It is of this kind, yet it is ca 
eva, also verily; the sarva-bhrt, supporter of all. 
Indeed, everything has existence as its basis, 
because the idea of 'existence' is present 
everywhere. Verily, even mirage etc. do not occur 
without some basis. Therefore, It is sarva-bhrt, the 
supporter of all-It upholds everything. There can 
be this other organs as well for the realization of 
the existence of the Knowable: Nirgunam, without 
quality-the qualities are sattva, rajas and tamas; 
that Knowable is free from them; and yet It is the 
guna-bhoktr, perceiver of qualities; i.e., that 
Knowable is the enjoyer and experiencer of the 
qualities, sattva, rajas and tamas, which, assuming 
the forms of sound etc., transform them-selves into 
happiness, sorrow, delusion, etc. Further, 
13.16 Existing outside and inside all beings; 
moving as well as non-moving, It is 
incomprehensible due to subtleness. So also, It is 
far away, and yet near. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.16 Existing, bahih, outside- the word bahih is 
used with reference to the body including the skin, 
which is misconceived through ignorance to be the 
Self, and which is itself taken as the boundary. 
Similarly, the word antah, inside, is used with 
reference to the indwelling Self, making the body 
itself as the boundary. When 'outside' and 'inside' 
are used, there may arise the contingency of the 
nonexistence of That in the middle. Hence this is 
said: acaram caram eva ca, moving as well as not 
moving-even that which appears as the body, 
moving or not moving, is nothing but the 
Knowable, in the same way as the appearance of a 
snake on a rope (is nothing but the rope). In all 
empirical things, moving as also non-moving, be 
the Knowable, why should It not be known by all 
as such? In answer it is said: It is true that It shines 
through everything; still it is subtle like space. 
Therefore, although It is the Knowable, tat, It; is 
avijneyam, incomprehensible to the ignorant 
people; suksmatvat, due to Its intrinsic subtleness. 
But to the enlightened It is ever known from the 
valid means of knowledge such as (the texts), 'All 
this is verily the Self' (Ch. 7.25.2), 'Brahman alone is 
all this' (Nr. Ut.7), etc. It is durastham, far away, 
since, to the unenlightened, It is unattainable even 
in millions of years. And tat, That; is antike, near, 
since It is the Self of the enlightened. 
13.17 And the Knowable, though undivided, 
appears to be existing as divided in all beings, and 
It is the sustainer of all beings as also the devourer 
and originator. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.17 And further, tat, that; jneyam, Knowable; 
though avibhaktam, undivided, remaining the 
same in all beings like space; iva sthitam, appears 
to be existing; as vibhaktam, divided; bhutesu, in 
all beings, because It is perceived as existing in the 
bodies themselves. And just as a rope etc. are with 
regard to a snake etc. That are falsely imagined, 
similarly that Knowable is bhutabhartr, the 
sustainer of all beings, sinced It sustains all during 
the period of their existence; grasisnu, the 
devourer, at the time of dissolution; and 
prabhavisnu, the originator, at the time of creation. 
Further, it the Knowable is not perceived though 
existing everywhere, then It is darkness? Not! 
What then? 
13.18 That is the Light even of the lights; It is 
spoken of as beyond darkness. It is Knowledge, the 
Knowable, and the Known. It exists specially [A 
variant reading is dhisthitam.-Tr.] in the hearts of 
all. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.18 Tat, that Knowable; is the jyotih, Light; api, 
even; jyotisam, of the lights-of the sun etc. For the 
lights like the sun etc. shine because they are 
enkindled by the light of consciousness of the Self, 
as is known from Upanisadic texts like, 'Illumined 
by whose light the sun shines' (Tai. Br. 3.12.9.7), 'By 
Its light all this shines variously' (Sv. 6.14), and 
from the Smrti also, as here (in the Gita) itself: 'That 
light in the sun...' (15.12), etc. It is ucyate, spoken of 
as; param, beyond, untouched by; tamasah, 
darkness; ignorance. For cheering up anyone who 
may become disheartened by thinking that 
Knowledge etc. is difficult to attain, the Lord says: 
It is jnanam, Knowledge-humility etc. (verse 7, 
etc.); jneyam, the Knowable, which has been 
spoken of in, 'I shall speak of that which is to be 
known' (12); and jnana-gamyam, the Known. The 
Knowable itself is referred to as jnanagamyam, 
when after being known, It becomes the result of 
Knowledge. But when It is an object to be known, 
It is called jneyam. All these three which are such, 
visthitam, specially exist; hrdi, in the hearts, in the 
intellects; sarvasya, of all, of all creatures. For these 
three are, indeed, perceived there. This verse is 
begun for concluding the topic under discussion: 
13.19 Thus has been spoken of in brief the field as 
also Knowledge and the Knowable. By 
understanding this My devotee becomes qualified 
for My state. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.19 Iti, thus; uktam, has been spoken commencing from 'I shall speak of that which is to 
be known' (12) and ending with 'It is spoken of as 
beyond darkness' (17); samasatah, in brief; the 
ksetram, field -beginning with the 'great elements' 
and ending with 'for titude' (5,6); tatha, as also; 
jnanam, Knowledge-beginning from 'humility' (7) 
and ending with 'contemplation on the Goal of the 
knowledge of Reality' (11); and the jneyam, 
Knowable. All this has been stated by way of 
summarizing the purport of the Vedas and the 
Gita. Who is fit for this true knowledge? The 
answer is: madbhaktah, My devotee, who 
attributes the fact of being the Self of all to Me who 
am God, Vasudeva, the Omniscient, the supreme 
Teacher, (and) whose conviction has been 
saturated with the idea that whatever he sees, 
hears or touches, all that verily is Lord Vasudeva. 
Vijnaya, by understanding; etat, this, the aforesaid 
true knowledge; he upa-padyate, becomes 
qualified; mad-bhavaya, for My State (bhava) -the 
State of being the supreme Self; for that State of 
Mine. He attains Liberation. There in the Seventh 
Chapter have been presented the two aspects [Cf.15.16-18.] 
of God, viz the higher and the lower, 
characterized as the field and the Knower of the 
field. And it has also been said, '(Understand thus) 
that all things have these as their source' (7.6). The 
explanation as to how creatures have the two 
aspects, the field and the Knower of the field, as 
their source is now being stated: 
13.20 Know both Nature and also the individual 
soul [Prakrti is sometimes translated as matter, and 
purusa as spirit.-Tr.] to be verily without 
beginning; know the modifications as also the 
qualities as born of Nature. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.20 Viddhi, know; ubhau, both; prakrtim Nature; 
and also the purusam, individual soul;-these two; 
Nature and the soul. the aspects of God-to be api, 
verily; anadi, without beginning. Those two that 
have no beginning (adi), are anadi. Since the 
godhood of God is eternal, therefore it is logical 
that even His aspects also should have eternality. 
For God's god-hood consists verily in having the 
two aspects. Those two aspects through which God 
becomes the cause of creation, continuance and 
dissolution of the Universe, and which are 
beginningless, are the sources of mundane 
existence. Some interpret the phrase anadi in the 
tatpurusa [Tatpurusa: Name of a class of 
compounds in which the first member determines 
the sense of the other members, or in which the last 
member is defined or qualified by the first, without 
losing its original independence.-V.S.A.] sense of 
na adi, not primeval (not cause). (According to 
them) thereby indeed is established the causality of 
God. Again, if Nature and soul themselves be 
eternal, the mundane existence would surely be 
their creation, and the causality of the mundane 
existence would not be God's. That is wrong 
because, there being nothing to rule over before the 
emergence of Nature and soul, there will arise the
contingency of God ceasing to be God! And if the 
mundane state be uncaused [Uncaused, i.e. not 
caused by Nature and soul, but by God 
independently of those two aspects.] there arises 
the contingency of the absence of Liberation, [If 
God were. Himself the sole cause of mundane 
existence, independently of His two aspects, then it 
would be endless because there would be nothing 
to prevent liberated souls from being put under 
bondage again.] the scriptures becoming useless, 
and the absence of bondage and freedom. On the 
other hand, all these become justifiable if God and 
the two aspects be eternal. How? Viddhi, know; 
the vikaran, modifications that will be spoken of the intellect etc., the body and the organs; ca eva, 
as also; gunan, the qualities (sattva etc.)-manifest in 
the form of the mental states of happiness, sorrow 
and attachment; as prakriti-sambhavan, born of 
Nature. Nature, Maya, is the power of God, which 
is the cause of the modifications and which consists 
of the three qualities. Those modifications and 
qualities, which have that Nature as their source,-
know those modifications and qualities as 'born of 
Nature', as transformations of Nature. Which 
again, are those modifications and qualities born of 
Nature? 
13.21 With regard to the source of body and 
organs, Nature is said to be the cause. The soul is 
the cause so far as enjoyership of happiness and 
sorrow is concerned. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.21 Karya-karana-kartrtve, with regard to the 
source of body and organs: Karya is the body, and 
karana are the thirteen [Five sense organs, five 
motor organs, mind, intellect and ego.] organs 
existing in it. Here, by the word karya are 
understood the aforesaid elements that produce 
the body as also the objects which are 
modifications born of Nature. And since the 
qualities-which are born of Nature and manifest 
themselves as happiness, sorrow and delusion-are 
dependent on the organs, (therefore) they are 
implied by the word karana, organs. The 
kartrtvam, (lit) agentship, with regard to these 
body and organs consists in being the source of the 
body and organs. With regard to this source of the 
body and organs, prakrtih, Nature; ucyate, is said 
to be; the hetuh, cause, in the sense of being the 
originator. Thus, by virtue of being the source of 
body and organs, Nature is the cause of mundane 
existence. Even if the reading be karya-karana kartrtva, karya (effect, modification) will mean 
anything that is the transformation of something; 
and karana (cause) will be that which becomes 
transformed. So the meaning of the compund will 
be: 'with regard to the source of the effect and the 
cause'. Or, karya means the sixteen [The eleven 
organs (five sensory, five motor, and mind) and the 
five objects (sound etc.).] modificaitons, and karana 
means the seven [Mahat, egoism, and the five 
subtle elements.] transformations of Nature. They 
themselves are called effect and cuase. So far as the 
agentship with regard to these is concerned Nature 
is said to be the cause, because of the same reason 
of being their originator. As to how the soul can be 
the cause of mundane existence is being stated: 
Purusah, the soul, the empirical being, the knower 
of the field-all these are synonymous; is the hetuh, 
cause; bhoktrtve, so far as enjoyership, the fact of 
being the perceiver; sukha-duhkhanam, of 
happiness and sorrow-which are objects of 
experience, is concerned. How, again, is it asserted 
with respect to Nature and soul that, they are the 
causes of mundane existence by virtue of this fact 
of their (respectively) being the source of body and 
organs, and the perceiver of happiness and 
sorrow? As to this the answer is being stated: How 
can there be any mundane existence if there be no 
modification of Nature in the form of body and 
organs, happiness and sorrow, and cause and 
effect, and there be no soul, the conscious being, to 
experience them? On the other hand, there can be 
mundane existence when there is a contact, in the 
form of ignorance, between Nature-modified in the 
form of body and organs, and cause and effect as 
an object of experience and the soul opposed to it 
as the experiencer. Therefore it was reasonable to 
have said that, Nature and soul become the cause 
of mundane existence by (respectively) becoming 
the originators of the body and organs, and the 
perceiver of happiness and sorrow. What again is 
this that is called worldly existence? Worldly 
existence consists in the experience of happiness 
and sorrow; and the state of mundane existence of 
the soul consists in its being the experiencer of 
happiness and sorrow. It has been asserted that the 
state of mundane existence of the soul consists in 
its being the experiencer of happiness and sorrow. 
How does it come about? This is being answered: 
13.22 Since the soul is seated in Nature, therefore it 
experiences the qualities born of Nature. Contact 
with the qualities is the cause of its births in good 
and evil wombs. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.22 Hi, since; purusah, the soul, the experiencer; 
is prakrtisthah, seated in Nature, which is 
characterized as ignorance and gets transformed 
into body and organs, i.e., (since the soul) has 
become identified with Nature; therefore, bhunkte, 
[Bhunkte, lit. enjoys, here means 'experiences'.-Tr.] 
it enjoys, i.e. experiences; gunan, the qualities manifest as happiness, sorrow and delusion; 
prakrtijan, born of Nature, thinking thus, 'I am 
happy, sorrowful, deluded, learned.' Even though 
ignorance continues as a cause, still the main cause 
of worldly existence, of birth, is the contact, the 
self-identification, with the qualities happiness,sorrow, and delusion-when they are 
experienced, as is affirmed by the Upanisadic text, 
'What it desires, it resolves' (Br. 4.4.5) [See 
Sankaracarya's Comm. on this.-Tr.]. That very fact 
is stated here: Gunasangah, contact with the 
qualities; is karanam, the cause; asya, of its, the 
soul's, the experiencer's; sad-asad-yoni-janmasu, 
births in good and evil wombs. Self-identification 
with the qualities is the cause of the experience of 
births in good and evil wombs. Or the meaning is, 
'Self-identification with the qualities is the cause or 
its worldly existence through birth in good and evil 
wombs,' where the words 'of worldly existence' 
have to be supplied. The good wombs are he 
wombs of gods and others; evil wombs are the 
wombs of gods and others; evil wombs are the 
wombs of beasts etc. From the force of the context 
it is to be understood that there is no contradiction 
in including even human wombs among 'good and 
evil wombs'. It amounts to saying that ignorance called 'being seated in Nature'-and the contact 
with. i.e. the desire for, the qualities are the causes 
of worldly existence. And this is said so that they 
can be avoided. And in the scripture Gita it is a 
well-known fact that knowledge and dispassion, 
accompanied with renunciation, are the causes of 
removing this (ignorance and self-identification 
with the qualities). That knowledge about the field 
and the Knower of the field, too, has been 
presented earlier. This has also been said in, '...by 
realizing which one attains Immortality' (12), etc., 
through the process of refutation of elements alien 
(to the Self) and superimposition of qualities 
belonging to others (that are not the Self). [Verse 12 
deals with the refutation of alien elements, and 
vere 13 with the superimposition of qualities 
belonging to others.] A direct presentation is again 
being made of that (knowledge) itself: 
13.23 He who is the Witness, the Permitter, the 
Sustainer, the Experiencer, the great Lord, and who 
is also spoken of as the transcendental Self is the 
supreme Person in this body. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.23 He who is the upadrasta, Witness, who while 
staying nearby does not Himself become involved: 
As when the priests and the performer of a 
sacrifice remain engaged in duties connected with 
the sacrifice, there is another (called Brahma) 
remaining nearby who is unengaged, is versed in 
the science of sacrifices and witnesses the merit or 
demerit of the activities of the priest and the 
performer of the sacrifice, similarly, He who is not 
engaged in the activities of and is different from 
the body and organs, who has characteristics other 
than theirs, and is the proximate (upa) observer 
(drasta) of the body and organs engaged in their 
duties, is the upa-drasta. Or: The observers are the 
body, eyes, mind, intellect and the soul. Of them 
the body is the external observer. Proceeding 
inwards from that (body), the Self is the inmost as 
also the proximate observer, compared with which 
there is no other higher and inner observer. The 
Self, because of being the most proximate observer, 
is the upadrasta. Or, It is the upadrasta since, like 
the non-looker of a sarifice, It witness everything. 
And He is the anu-manta, Permitter: 
Anumananam, approval, means satisfaction with 
those performers (viz body and organs) as also 
their perfomances. The agent of that (approval) is 
the anumanta. Or, He is the anumanta since, even 
though Himself not engaged in the activities of the 
body and organs, He appears to be favourably 
disposed towards and engaged in them. Or, He is 
the anumanta because, when the body and organs 
are engaged in their own functions, He remains as 
a witness and never dissuades them. It is the 
bharta, Sustainer: Bharanam means the 
continuance in their own state of the body, organs, 
mind and intellect, which reflect consciousness and 
have become aggregated owing to the need of 
serving the purpose [Viz enjoyment, or Liberation.-
Tr.] of some other entity, viz the conscious Self. 
And that (continuance) is verily due to the 
consciousness that is the Self. In this sense the Self 
is said to be the Sustainer. It is the bhokta, 
Experiencer: As heat is by fire, similarly, the 
experiences of the intellect-in the form of 
happiness, sorrow and delusion in relation to all 
objects-, when born as though permeated by the 
consciousness that is the Self, are manifested 
differently by the Self which is of the nature of 
eternal Consciousness. In this sense the Self is said 
to be the Experiencer. He is maheswarah, the great 
God, because, as the Self of all and independent, 
He is the great Ruler. He is paramatma, the 
transcendental Self, because He is the Self which 
has the characteristics of being the supreme 
Witness etc. of (all) those-beginning from the body 
and ending with the intellect-which are imagined 
through ignorance to be the indwelling Self. He is 
api ca, also; uktah, spoken of, referred to, in the 
Upanisads; iti, as, with the words; 'He is the 
indwelling One, the paramatma, the 
transcendental Self.' [Ast reads atah in place of 
antah. So the translation of the sentence will be: 
Therefore He is also referred to as the 
transcendental Self in the Upanisads.-Tr.] Where is 
He? The parah, suprem; purusah, Person, who is 
higher than the Unmanifest and who will be 
spoken of in, 'But different is the supreme Person 
who is spoken of as the transcendental Self' (15.17); 
is asmin, in this; dehe, body. What has been 
presented in, '...also understand Me to be the 
Knower of the field' (2), has been explained and 
conclude. 
13.24 He who knows thus the Person and Nature 
along with the qualities will not be born again, in 
whatever way he may live. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.24 Sah yah, he who; vetti, knows, in the manner 
described; the purusam, Person, that Self possessed 
of the characteristics stated above, as 'I myself (am 
That)'; and knows prakrtim, Nature as described 
above, which is characterized as ignorance; to have 
been eradicated by Knowledge, saha, along with; 
gunaih, the qualities which are its modifications; 
na abhijayate, will not be born; bhuyah, again-after 
the fall of this body of the man of realization, he 
does not become born again for (taking) another 
body, i.e. he does not take up another body; 
sarvatha api, in whatever way; vartamanah, he 
may live. From the word api it is understood that, 
it goes without saying that one who is firm in his 
own duty is not reborn. Objection: Though it has 
been said that there is absence of rebirth after the 
dawn of Knowledge, still is not illogical that 
actions done (in the present life) before the rise of 
Knowledge and those done subsequently, as also 
those done in the many past lives, should be 
destroyed without yielding their results? Hence 
there should be three births! For destruction of 
acquired merit is not logical, to the same extent as 
actions that have produced the present birth and 
are yielding their proper results (cannot be 
destroyed). Besides, it is not understood that 
actions have distinctions [Since all actions arise 
from ignorance, they are on the same level so far so 
they are opposed to Knowledge; i.e., there can be 
no such distinction among actions as 'those which 
have started yielding results' and 'those that have 
not'.]. Therefore, the actions of the three kinds, 
without exception, will produce three births or 
they all collectively will produce one birth. 
Otherwise, if the acquired merits become 
destroyed, it will lead to loss of faith everywhere as 
well as to the purposelessness of scriptures. 
Therefore it has been illogical to say, 'he will not be 
born again.' Reply: No, for the burning away of all 
the actions of the man of knowledge has been 
stated in hundreds of Upanisadic texts such as: 
'And all one's actions become dissipated' (Mu.2.2.8); 
'Anyone who knows (that supreme) 
Brahman, becomes Brahman' (op. cit. 3.2.9); 'For 
him the delay is for so long only (as he does not 
become freed)' (Ch. 6.14.2); 'As the fibres at the tip 
of a blade of reed (become completely burnt...,' so) 
all actions 'get completely burnt' (op. cit. 5.24.3). 
Here too the burning of all actions has been stated 
in, 'as a blazing fire reduces pieces of wood to 
ashes,...'etc. (4.37), and He will also say so (later) 
[See 18.66: 'I shall free you from all sins,' etc.-Tr.]. 
This accords with reason also. Verily, actions, 
which arise from the seed of evils [Klesas, evils-see 
note under 8.19-Tr.] like ignorance and desires, 
germinate the sprout of rebirth. Here also it has 
been said by the Lord in various places that actions 
which are associated with egoism and desire for 
results bear fruits, not the others. And there is also 
the verse: 'As seeds burnt by fire do not germinate, 
so also the Self does not acquire another body due 
to evils that have been burnt by Knowledge (cf. 
Mbh. Va. 199. 107). Objection: It may be granted for 
the present that actions performed after the rise of 
Knowledge are burnt by Knowledge, since they 
coexist with Knowledge. But the burning away of 
actions done in this life prior to the rise of 
Knowledge and those done in the many past lives 
is not reasonable. Reply: No, because of the 
qualification, 'all actions' (4.37). Objection: May it 
not be that 'all actions' means those that are 
undertaken after Illumination? Reply: No, for there 
is no reason for the restriction (of the meaning). On 
the other hand, as for the statement, 'just as actions 
that have produced the present birth and are 
already active in producing their results do not get 
dissipated even after Illumination, similarly it is 
not reasonable that actions which have not 
commenced producing their results should get 
dissipated,'-that is wrong. Objection: Why? Reply: 
Since they have already begun producing results, 
like an arrow that has been shot: As an arrow, 
freed earlier from a bow for hitting a target, even 
after piercing through the target comes to a stop 
only after falling down as a result of the dissipation 
of its initial momentum, similarly, actions that 
produced the (present) body verily continue, even 
after fulfilling the purpose of maintaining the 
body, to exist as before until the dissipation of their 
inherent tendencies. But, as that very arrow, when 
it has not acquired the momentum, needed for 
action, when it has not been shot even though fixed 
on the bow, can be withdrawn, similarly, actions 
which have not begun yielding their results may be 
rendered unproductive by Knowledge, even while 
existing in their receptacle. [The internal organ 
bearing the reflection of Consciousness.] Hence, it 
is established that , it has been reasonable to state 
that on the fall of the present body of an 
enlightened person, 'He is not born again.' Here are 
being presented these meditation etc. which are the 
alternative means for the realization of the Self: 
13.25 Through meditation some realize the Self in 
(their) intellect with the help of the internal organ; 
others through Sankhya-yoga, and others through 
Karma-yoga. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.25 Dhyanena, through meditation: Meditation 
means contemplation (on the Self) after 
withdrawing into the mind with concentration the 
organs of hearing etc. from the objects like sound 
etc., and then withdrawing the mind into the 
indwelling conscious Self. Thus, from the citation 
of such illustrations as, 'the crane meditates, as it 
were, 'the earth meditates, as it were; the 
mountains meditate, as it were' (Ch. 7.6.1), it 
follows that meditation is a constant and 
uninterrupted current of thought like a line of 
pouring oil. Through that meditation, kecit, some 
yogis; pasyanti, realize; the indwelling conscious 
atmanam, Self; atmani, in (their) intellect; atmana, 
with the help of the internal organ that has been 
purified by meditation. Anye, others; sankhyena 
yogena, through Sankhya-yoga: Sankhya means 
thinking, 'These qualities, viz sattva, rajas and 
tamas, are objects of my perception; I am the Self, 
distinct from them, a witness of their functions, 
eternal and different from the qualities.' This 
Sankhya is Yoga. [By Sankhya is meant that 
knowledge which arises from the foregoing 
reflection. This knowledge is itself called Yoga 
(concentration of mind) inasmuch as it is similar to 
Yoga in leading to the realization of the Self.] 
Through that they realize the Self with the help of 
the internal organ. This is how it is to be construed. 
And anye, others; karma-yogena, through Karma yoga-action itself being the Yoga: Action 
performed with the idea of dedication to God is 
figuratively called Yoga since it leads to Yoga. 
(others realize) with the help of that (action), 
through purification of the mind and rise of 
Knowledge. [The best among the yogis are 
competent for meditation (dhyana); the modiocre 
for reflection (Sankhya); and the lowest for Karma yoga.] 
13.26 Others, agian, who do not know thus, take to 
thinking after hearing from others; they, too, who 
are devoted to hearing, certainly overcome death. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.26 Anye tu, others again; ajanantah, who do not 
know the Self as described above; evam, thus, even 
in one of these alternative ways; upasate, take to 
thinking, take to reflection, being imbued with 
faith; srutva, after hearing; anyebhyah, from 
others, from the teachers, having been told, 'Think 
only of this.' Te api ca, they, too; sruti-parayanah, 
who are devoted to hearing, to whom hearing is 
the supreme course, the best discipline for starting 
on the path to Liberation, i.e., those who, 
themselves lacking in discrimination, accept only 
others' advice as most authoritative; eva, certainly; 
ati-taranti, overcome; mrtyum, death, i.e. the 
mundane existence which is fraught with death. 
The implication is; It goes without saying that 
those discriminating people who are idenpendent 
in the application of the valid means of knowledge, 
cross over death. That the knowledge of the 
identity of the Knower of the field and God leads 
to Liberation has been stated in, '...by realizing 
which one attains Immortality' (12). For what 
reason is it so? To point out that reason the (next) 
verse is begun: 
13.27 O scion of the Bharata dynasty, whatever 
object, moving or non-moving, comes into being, 
know that to be from the association of the field 
and the Knower of the field! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.27 Bharatarsabha, O scion of the Bharata 
dynasty; yavat kincit, whatever; sattvam, object;-as 
to whether they are without exception the Lord 
says-sthavara-jangamam, moving or non-moving; 
sanjayate, comes into being; viddhi, know; tat, that; 
as originating ksetra-ksetrajna-samyogat, from the 
association of the field and the Knower of the field. 
Objection: What, again, is meant by this 
'association of the field and the Knower of the 
field'? Since the Knower of the field is partless like 
space, therefore Its conjunction with the field 
cannot be a kind of relationship like coming 
together of a rope and a pot through the contact of 
their parts. Nor can it be an intimate and 
inseparable relation as between a thread and a 
cloth, since it is not admitted that the field and the 
Knower of the field are mutually related by way of 
being cause and effect. Reply: The answer is: The 
association of the field and the Knower of the field which are the object and the subject, respectively, 
and are of different natures-is in the form of 
superimposition of each on the other an also of 
their qualities, as a consequence of the absence of 
discrimination between the real natures of the field 
and the Knower of the field. This is like the 
association of a rope, nacre, etc. with the 
superimposed snake, silver, etc. owing to the 
absence of discrimination between them. This 
association of the field and the Knower of the field 
in the form of superimposition is described as false 
knowledge. After having known the distinction 
between and the characteristics of the field and the 
Knower of the field according to the scriptures, 
and having separated, like a stalk from the 
Munjagrass, the above-described Knower of the 
field from the field whose characteristics have been 
shown earlier, he who realizes the Knowable (i.e. 
the Knower of the field)-which, in accordance with 
'That is neither called being nor non-being' (12), is 
devoid of all distinctions created by adjuncts- as 
identical with Brahman; and he who has the firm 
realization that the field is surely unreal like an 
elephant created by magic, a thing seen in a dream, 
an imaginary city seen in the sky, etc., and it 
appears as though real-for him false knowledge 
becomes eradicated, since it is opposed to the right 
knowledge described above. Since the cause of his 
rebirth has been eliminated. therefore what was 
said in, 'He who knows thus the Person and 
Nature along with the qualities...', that the man of 
realization is not born again (23), has been a 
reasonable statement. In 'He...will not be born 
again' (23) has been stated the result of right 
knowledge, which is the absence of birth owing to 
the destruction of ignorance etc., the seeds of 
worldly existence. The cause of birth, viz the 
association of the field and the Knower of the field 
brought about by ignorance, has also been stated. 
Hence, although right knowledge, which is the 
remover of that ignorance, has been spoken of, still 
it is being stated over again in other words: 
13.28 He sees who sees the supreme Lord as 
existing equally in all beings, and as the 
Imperishable among the perishable. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.28 Sah, he; pasyati, sees; yah, who; pasyati, 
sees;-whom?-parameswaram, the supreme Lord the Lord who is supreme as compared with the 
body, organs, mind, intellect, the Unmanifest and 
the individual soul; as tisthantam, existing, having 
His presence; samam, equally, without distinction;-
where?-sarvesu, in all; bhutesu, beings, all living 
things from Brahma to the non-moving;-he who 
sees Him existing equally in all living things. The 
Lord specifies them by the word vinasyatsu, 
among the perishable; and He also specifies Him, 
the supreme Lord, by the word avinasyantam, the 
Imperishable. This is meant for showing the 
absolute difference between the living things and 
God. How? For, all the modifications [See note 3 on 
p.38.-Tr.] of an existing thing have as their root that 
modification of an existing thing described as birth. 
All other modifications of existing things that 
follow birth end with destruction. After 
destruction there is no modification of an existing 
thing, because the object itself becomes 
nonexistent. Indeed, qualities can exist so long as 
the thing qualified exists. Therefore, by the 
reiteration of the absence of the last modification of 
an existing thing, all its preceding modifications 
become negated along with their effects. Hence it is 
established that the supreme Lord is very greatly 
different from all beings, and is also 
Unconditioned [Free from all modifications that 
things are subject to.] and One. He sees who thus 
sees the supreme Lord as described. Objection: Is it 
not that all poeple see? What is the need of 
specification? Reply: True, they see; but they see 
contrarily! Hence the Lord specifies, 'He alone 
sees'. As in comparison with one who, suffering 
from the (eye) disease called Timira, sees many 
moons, the person who sees one moon is 
distingusihed by saying, 'He alone sees,' similarly, 
here as well, the man who sees the one undivided 
Self as described above is distinguished from those 
who contrarily see many and differentiated selves, 
by saying 'He alone sees'. Others, though seeing, 
do not see because they see contrarily like the 
person who sees many moons. This is the meaning. 
The obove-described true knowledge has to be 
praised by stating its result. Hence the verse 
begins: 
13.29 Since by seeing equally God who is present 
alike everywhere he does not injure the Self by the 
Self, therefore he attains the supreme Goal. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.29 Hi, since; pasyan, by seeing, by realizing; 
samam, equally; isvaram, God, i.e., (by realizing 
Him) as described in the immediately preceding 
verse; who is samavasthitam, present alike; 
sarvatra, everywhere, in all beings;-what follows 
from seeing equally?-he na, does not; hinasti, 
injure; his own atmanam, Self; atmana, by the Self, 
by his own Self; tatah, therefore, as a result of that 
non-injuring; yati, he attains; the param, supreme; 
gatim, Goal, called Liberation. Objection: Is it not 
that no creature whatsoever injures himself by 
himself? Why do you refer to an irrelevant thing by 
saying, 'He does not injure...,which is like saying, 
'Fire should neither be lit on the earth nor in the 
sky,' etc.? Reply: This defect does not arise, because 
it is logical with reference to an unenlightened 
person's ignoring the Self. For, all unillumined 
people ignore the very wellknown Self which is 
manifest and directly perceptible, and regard the 
non-Self as the Self. By performing righteous and 
unrighteous acts they destroy even that self which 
has been accepted, and adopt another new self. 
And destroying even that, they take up another. 
Similarly, destroying even that, they adopt 
another. In this way they destroy the self that had 
been accepted successively. Thus, all unillumined 
persons are destroyers of the Self. But that which is 
the Self in reality, even that remains as though 
destroyed for ever by ignorance, because of the 
absence of any benefit from Its presence. So, all 
unenlightened persons are, verily, destroyers of the 
Self. On the contrary, the other person who has 
realized the Self as described does not injure in 
either way [i.e. either through superimposition or 
through non-super-imposition.] the Self by his own 
Self. Therefore he attains the supreme Goal, i.e., the 
result stated above comes to him. Lest it be 
doubted that what was said in, 'seeing equally God 
who is present in all beings, he does not injure the 
Self by the Self, is improper with regard to the 
selves which are diverse according to the 
differences created by the variety in their own 
qualities and actions, the Lord says: 
13.30 And he who sees actions as being done in 
various ways by Nature itself, and also the Self as 
the non-agent,-he sees. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.30 And yah, he who; pasyati, sees, realizes; 
karmani, actions, those performed through speech, 
mind and body; as kriyamanani, being done, being 
accomplished; sarvasah, in various ways; prakrtya, 
by Nature-Nature is God's Maya consisting of the 
three qualities, as is said in the Upanisadic text, 
'However, know Maya as Nature' (Sv. 4.10); by that 
Nature; eva, itself-not by the other [Not by the 
Pradhana of the Sankhyas, known otherwise as 
prakrti.] which transforms itself in the form of 
cause and effects such as Mahat etc.; tatha, and 
also; atmanam, the Self, the Knower of the field; as 
akartaram, the non-agent, devoid of all adjuncts; 
sah, he; pasyati, sees-he is the one who has realized 
the supreme Reality. This is the idea. What is 
implied is that there is no valid proof about 
differences in the Non-agent who is devoid of 
qualities and is unconditioned like space. The Lord 
elaborates again in other words that very true 
knowledge: 
13.31 When one realizes that the state of diversity 
of living things is rooted in the One, and that their 
manifestation is also from That, then one becomes 
identified with Brahman. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.31 Yada, when, at the time when; anupasyati, 
one realizes-having reflected in accordance with 
the instructions of the scriptures and the teachers, 
one realizes as a matter of one's own direct 
experience that 'All this is but the Self' (Ch. 7.25.2); 
that bhuta-prthak-bhavam, the state of diversity of 
living things; is ekastham, rooted in the One, 
existing in the one Self; and their vistaram, 
manifestation, origination; tatah, eva, is also from 
That-when he realizes that origination in such 
diverse ways as, 'the vital force is from the Self, 
hope is from the Self, memory [Smara, memory; 
see Sankaracarya's Comm. on Ch. 7.13.1.-Tr.] is 
from the Self, space is from the Self, fire is from the 
Self, water is from the Self, coming into being and 
withdrawal are owing to the Self, food is from the 
Self' (op. cit. 7.26.1); tada, then, at that time; 
brahma sampadyate, one becomes identified with 
Brahman Itself. This is the import. If the same Self 
be the Self in all the bodies, then there arises the 
possiblity of Its association with their defects. 
Hence this is said: 
13.32 Being without beginning and without 
qualities, O son of Kunti, this immutable, supreme 
Self does not act. nor is It affected [Also translated 
as tainted.-Tr.], although existing in the body. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.32 Anadivat, being without beginning: Adih 
means cause; that which has no cause is anadih. 
That which has a cause undergoes loss of its own 
characteristics. But this One, being causeless, has 
no parts. This being so, It does not suffer loss. So 
also, nirgunatvat, being without qualities: indeed, 
It si only something possessing qualities that 
perishes owing to the losss of its qualities. But this 
One, being without qualities, does not perish. 
Hence, ayam, this; paramatma, supreme Self; is 
avyayah, immutable. It suffers no depletion. 
Therefore It is immutable. Since this is so, 
therefore, api, although; sarira-sthah, existing in 
the body-since the perception of the Self occurs in 
the bodies, It is said to be 'existing in the body'; 
even then, It na, does not; karoti, act. From the very 
fact that It does not act, It na, is not; lipyate, 
affected by the result of any action. For, one who is 
an agent of action becomes affected by its result. 
But this One is not an agent. Hence It is not 
affected by any result. This is the meaning. 
Objection: Who is it, again, that acts in the body 
and becomes affected? On the one hand, if there be 
some embodied being other than the supreme Self 
who acts and becomes affected, then it has been 
improper to say in, 'And also understand Me to be 
the Knower of the field,' etc., that the Knower of 
the field and God are one. Again, if there be no 
embodied being who is different from God, then it 
has to be stated who is it that acts and gets affected. 
Or it has to be asserted that the supreme One does 
not exist. [If the supreme One also acts like us, then 
He is no God.] Thus, since the Upanisadic 
philosophy as stated by the Lord is in every way 
difficult to understand and difficult to explain, it 
has therefore been abandoned by the Vaisesikas, 
the Sankhyas, the Jainas and the Buddhists. Reply: 
As to that, the following refutation has been stated 
by the Lord Himself in, 'But it is Nature that acts' 
(5.14). Indeed, Nature, which is nothing but 
ignorance, acts and becomes affected. In this way 
empirical dealing becomes possible; but in reality it 
does not occur in the one supreme Self. It has been 
accordingly shown by the Lord in various places 
that there is no duty to be performed by those who 
adhere to this philosophy of discriminating 
knowledge of the supreme Reality, who are 
steadfast in Knowledge, who have spurned actions 
arising out of ignorance, and who are mendicants 
belonging to the highest Order of monks. The Lord 
cites an illustration to show like what It does not 
act and is not affected: 
13.33 As the all-pervading space is not defiled, 
because of its subtlety, similarly the Self, present 
everywhere in the body [The singular number is 
used to denote a class, i.e. all bodies. See S.-Tr.], is 
not defiled. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.33 Yatha, as; sarva-gatam, the all-pervading; 
akasam, space;-though pervasive, still, na 
upalipyate, is not defiled, does not come into 
contact; saukmyat, because of its subtlety; tatha, 
similarly; atma, the Self; avasthitah, present, 
sarvatra, everywhere; dehe, in the body; na, is not; 
upalipyate, defiled. Further, 
13.34 As the single sun illumines this whole world, 
similarly, O descendant of the Bharata dynasty, the 
Knower of the field illumines the whole field. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.34 Yatha, as; ekam, the one; ravih, sun; 
prakasayati, illumines; imam, this; krtsnam, whole; 
lokam, world tatha, similarly;-who?-ksetri, the 
Knower of the field, i.e. the supreme Self, though 
one; prakasayati, illumines; krtsnam, the whole; 
ksetram, field, from the 'great elements' to 
'fortitude' (cf. 5-6). Here the illustration of the sun 
serves to highlight two aspects of the Self, viz that, 
like the sun, the Self is one in all the fields, and that 
It remains unaffected. This verse is meant for 
summarizing the idea of the whole of this chapter: 
13.35 Those who know thus through the eye of 
wisdom the distinction between the field and the 
Knower of the field, and the annihilation of the 
Matrix of beings,-they reach the Supreme. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
13.35 Ye, those who; viduh, know; evam, thus, in 
the manner described above; jnana-caksusa, 
through the eye of wisdom-the eye is the 
realization in the form of the knowledge of the Self, 
which arises from following the instructions of the 
scriptures and teachers; through that eye of 
wisdom; antaram, the distinction, the particular 
mutual distinction; ksetra-ksetrajnayoh, beween 
the field and the Knower of the field as they have 
been explained; and bhuta-prakrti-moksam, the 
annihilation of the Matrix of beings-the Matrix of 
beings is that which is described as ignorance and 
is called the Unmanifest; (those who know) the 
annihilation (moksanam) of that Matrix of beings; 
te, they; yanti, reach, go to; param, the Supreme, to 
Brahman, the Reality which is the suprme Goal. 
The idea is that they do not take up a body again. 
14.1 The Blessed Lord said -- I shall speak again of 
the supreme Knowledge, the best of all 
knowledges, by realizing which all the 
contemplatives reached the highest Perfection from 
here. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.1 The word param should be connected with the 
remote word jnanam. Pravaksyami, I shall speak; 
bhuyah, again-even though spoken of more than 
once in all the preceding chapters; of the param, 
supreme-it is supreme because it is concerned with 
the supreme Reality;-which is that?-jnanam, 
Knowledge; uttamam, the best-since it has the best 
result; jnananam, of all knowledges-. 'Of all 
knowledges' does not mean 'of humility' etc. (13.7-
11). What then? It means 'among knowledges of all 
knowable things like sacrifice etc.' They do not lead 
to Liberation, but this (Knowledge) leads to 
Liberation. Hence the Lord praises it with the 
words 'supreme' and 'best', so as to arouse interest 
in the intellect of the listener. Yat jnatva, by 
realizing which, by attaining which Knowledge; 
sarve, all; munayah, the contemplatives, the monks 
[But not those who espoused monasticsim as a 
formality in in the fourth stage of life.] gatah, 
reached, attained; itah, from here-when this 
bondage of the body had ceased; param, the 
highest; siddhim, Perfection, called Liberation. 
And the Lord shows the infallibility of this 
Perfection: 
14.2 Those who attain identity with Me by 
resorting of this Knowledge are not born even 
during creation, nor do they suffer pain during 
dissolution. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.2 Agatah, those who attain; mama sadharmyam, 
identity with Me the supreme God, unity with My 
real nature-sadharmyam, however, does not mean 
similarity of attributes, for, in the scripture Gita, 
distinction between the Knower of the field and 
God is not admitted; and this statement of the 
result is by way of eulogy-; upasritya, by resorting 
to i.e. by following; idam, this; jnanam, Knowledge 
as described, i.e., by following the means to 
Knowledge; na, are not; upajayante, born, 
produced; api, even; sarge, during creation; nor do 
they vyathanti, suffer pain, i.e. they do not perish; 
pralaye, during dissolution, when even Brahma 
perishes. The Lord says that association of this 
kind between the field and the Knower of the field 
is the origin of all beings: 
14.3 My womb is the great-sustainer. In that I place 
the seed. From that, O scion of the Bharata 
dynasty, occurs the birth of all things. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.3 Mama, My own Maya, i.e. Prakrti consisting of 
the three qualities, which belongs to Me; is the 
yonih, womb [Here Ast. adds 'karanam, cause' (-off 
all the creatures).-Tr.] for all the creatures. Since it 
(Prakrti) is great (mahat) as compared with all its 
effects, and it is the sustainer (brahma) [Prakrti is 
brahma since it permeates all of its own products.-
A.G.] of all its own transformations, therefore the 
womb itself is qualified as mahat brahma. Tasmin, 
in that, in the womb which is the great-sustainer; 
aham, I, God, possessed of the power in the form 
of the two aspects, viz the field and the Knower of 
the field; dadhami, place, deposit; garbham, the 
seed-the seed of the birth of Hiranayagarbha, te 
seed which is the cause of the birth of all things-; 
i.e., I bring the field into association with the 
Knower of the field who conforms to the nature of 
the limiting adjuncts, viz ignorance, desire and 
activity. Tatah, from that, from that deposition of 
the seed; O scion of the Bharata dynasty, bhavati, 
occurs; sambhavah, the birth, origination; sarva bhutanam, of all things, following the birth of 
Hiranyagarbha. 
14.4 O son of Kunti, whatever forms are born from 
all the wombs, of them the great-sustainer is the 
womb; I am the father who deposits the seed. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.4 O son of Kunti, yah, whatever; murtayah, 
forms-that have their parts and limbs integrated, 
which is characteristic of the formation of bodies; 
sambhavanti, are born; sarva-yonisu, from all 
wombs-from the wombs of gods, manes, humans, 
cattle, beasts, etc.; tasam, of them, of those forms; 
mahat brahma, the great-sustainer, which exists as 
all the (various) forms; is the yonih, womb, source. 
Aham, I, God; am the pita, father; bija-pradah, who 
desposits the seed, the agent of impregnation. 
(Now) is being stated which are the qualities and 
how they bind: 
14.5 O mighty-armed one, the qualities, viz sattva, 
rajas and tamas, born of Nature, being the 
immutable embodies being to the body. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.5 O mighty-armed one-who are possessed of 
hands which are great and mighty, and extend 
upto the knees, gunah, the qualities are named 
sattva, rajas and tamas. And they, prakrti sambhavah, born of Nature, born of Maya which 
belongs to God; nibadhnanti, bind, as it were; the 
avyayam, immutable-the immutability has been 
spoken of in the verse, 'Being without beginning...,' 
etc. (13.31); dehinam, embodied being; dehe, to the 
body. The word guna is a technical term, and is not 
a quality like colour etc. which inhere in some 
substance. Nor is it meant here that quality and 
substance are different. Therefore they are ever 
dependent on the Knower of the field, just as 
qualities are dependent (on some substance). Being 
of the nature of ignorance, they bind the Knower of 
the field, as it were. They come into being, making 
That (Knower) their sustainer. In this sense it is 
said that they bind. Objection; Was it not said that 
the embodied one does not become defiled (see 13.31-2)? 
So, why as it contrarily said here that 
'they bind'? Reply: We have rebutted this objection 
by using the word iva (as it were) in 'they bind, as 
it were'. 
14.6 Among them, sattva, being pure, [Nirmala, 
pure-transparent, i.e., capable of resisting any form 
of ignorance, and hence as illuminator, i.e.a 
revealer of Consciousness.] is an illuminator and is 
harmless. O sinless one, it binds through 
attachment to happiness and attachment to 
knowledge. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.6 Tatra, among them, among sattva etc.;-the 
characteristics of sattva itself is being stated first sattva, nirmalatvat, being pure like a crystal 
stone;is prakasakam, an illuminator; and 
anamayam, harmless. Anagha, O sinless one; 
badhnati, it binds. How? Sukhasangena, through 
attachment to happiness. Bringing about the
association of happiness, which is the object, with 
the Self, which is the subject, in the form of the 
idea, 'I am happy', is certainly an unreal contact 
with happiness. This as such is nescience, for the 
quality of an object cannot belong to a subject. And 
it has been said by the Lord that all the qualities, 
from 'desire' to 'fortitude' (see 13.6), are, indeed, of 
the field, which is the object. Therefore, it is 
certainly through nescience, which is an attribute 
[In reality, though nescience has no connection 
with the Self, yet, since there is none other with 
which it can become associated and since it has no 
independence, therefore the Commentator 
imagines it as an attribute of the Self.] of the Self 
and has the characteristics of non-discrimination 
between object and subject, that sattva apparently 
brings about the association with happiness, which 
is not the Self. It makes (the Self) attached, as it 
were; [Here Ast. adds 'asangam saktam iva, 
(makes) the Unattached attached, as it were'.-Tr.] 
makes one not possessed of happiness as though 
possessed of it! Similarly, it binds also jnana sangena, through attachment to knowledge. 
[Jnana, derived in the sense of 'that through which 
one knows,' means an instrument of knowledge, 
and not Consciousness. (S.: Knowledge arising 
from the study of the import of various scriptures; 
or, jnanam, means the scriptures, through which 
the supreme God is known and which leads to 
devotional practices, but not to steadfastness in 
(the absolute) Brahman.] Because of its 
concomitance with happiness, knowledge here is 
an attribute of the internal organ, the field, but not 
of the Self. Were it an attribute [If knowledge were 
a natural attribute of the Self, then there can be no 
question of the latter again becoming bound 
through association with the former.] of the Self, 
there could be no contact (between it and the Self), 
and 'bondage' would become illogical. Association 
with knowledge etc. should be understood in the 
same sense as with happiness. 
14.7 Know rajas to be of the nature of passion, born 
of hankering and attachment. O son of Kunti, that 
binds the embodied one through attachment to 
action. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.7 Viddhi, know; rajas to be ragatmakam, of the 
nature of passion (-raga is derived in the sense of 
that which colours-), having the property of 
colouring, like the ochre pigment etc.; trsna asanga-samud-bhavam, born of hankering and 
attachment-hankering is the longing for things not 
acquired; attachment is the clining-of the nature of 
fondness-of the mind to things in possession. O son 
of Kunti, tat, that, that rajas; nibadhnati, binds; 
dehinam, the embodied one; karma-sangena, 
through attachment to actions. Deep involvement 
in actions related to seen or unseen objects is 
karmasangah. Rajas binds through that. 
14.8 On the other hand, know tamas, which 
deludes all embodied beings, to be born of 
ignorance. O scion of the Bharata dynasty, that 
binds through inadvertence, laziness and sleep. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.8 Viddhi, know; tamas, the third qualitty; 
mahanam, which deludes, which is a cause of 
indiscrimination; sarva-dehinam, of all embodied 
beings; to be ajnanajam, born of ignorance. O scion 
of the Bharata dynasty, tat, that tamas; nibadhnati, 
binds; pramada-alasya-nidrabhih, through 
inadvertence, laziness and sleep. The activities of 
the qualities are again being briefly stated: 
14.9 O scion of the Bharata dynasty, sattva attaches 
one to happiness, rajas to action, while tamas, 
covering up knowledge, leads to inadvertence also. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.9 O scion of the Bharata dynasty, sattva, 
sanjayati, attaches one; sukhe, to happiness; rajas (-
attaches is understood-) karmani, to action; tu, 
while; tamas, avrtya, covering up, veiling; jnanam, 
knowledge, the discrimination produced by sattva; 
sanjayati, leads pramade, to inadvertence; uta, also. 
Pramada means non-performance of a duty on 
hand. When do the qualities produce the effects 
stated above? That is being answered: 
14.10 O scion of the Bharata dynasty, sattva 
increases by subduing rajas and tamas, rajas by 
overpowering sattva and tamas, and tamas by 
dominating over sattva and rajas. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.10 O scion of the Bharata dynasty, sattva 
bhavati, increases, comes into being; abhibhuya, by 
subduing both rajas and tamas. When sattva 
increases, then, coming to its own, it produces its 
own effects-knowledge, happiness, etc. Similarly, 
when the quality of rajas increases by 
overpowering both sattva and tamas, then it 
produces its own effects-activity and hankering. 
When the quality called tamas increases by 
similarly dominating over sattva and rajas, it then 
produces its own effects-obscuring of knowledge, 
etc. When any quality preponderates, then what is 
its indication? This is being answered: 
14.11 When the illumination that is knowledge 
radiates in this body through all the doors (of the 
senses), then one should know that sattva has 
increased greatly. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.11 Yada, when; prakasah, the illumination prakasa, illumination, is a function of the internal 
organ, intelligence; that itself is jnanam, 
knowledge; when this illumination called 
knowledge upajayate, radiates; asmin, in this; 
dehe, body; sarva-dvaresu, through all the doors all the sense organs, (viz) ear etc., are the Self's 
doors of perception; through all those doors; tada, 
then; through this indication, viz the illumination 
that is knowledge, vidyat, one should know; iti, 
that; sattva has vivrddham, increased; uta, greatly 
[See A.G.-Tr.]. This is the characteristics of rajas 
when it has become prominent: 
14.12 O best of the Bharata dynasty, when rajas 
becomes predominant, these come into being: 
avarice, movement, undertaking of actions, unrest 
and hankering. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.12 O best of the Bharata dynasty, when the 
quality of rajas vivrddhe, becomes predominant; 
etani, these indications; jayante, come into being; 
lobhah, avarice, the desire to appropriate other's 
possessions; pravrtih, movement in general; 
arambhah, undertaking;-of what?-karmanam, of 
actions; asamah, unrest, lack of tranquillity-(i.e.) 
manifestation of joy, attachment, etc.; and sprha, 
hankering, desire in general for all things. 
14.13 O descendant of the Kuru dynasty, when 
tamas predominates these surely [i.e. without 
exception.-M.S.] come into being: non discrimination and inactivity, inadvertence and 
delusion. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.13 Kuru-nandana, O descendant of the Kuru 
dynasty; when the quality of tamas vivrddhe, 
predominates; etani, these indications; eva, surely; 
jayante, come into being; extreme aprakasah, non discrimination; and apravrttih, inactivity; its [i.e. of 
non-discrimination.] effects, pramadah, in advertence; and mohah, delusion, i.e. stupidity, 
which is a from of non-discrimination. Whatever 
result is achieved even after death, that is also 
owing to attachment and desire; every-thing is 
certainly caused by the qualities. By way of 
showing this the Lord says: 
14.14 When an embodied one undergoes death 
while sattva is exclusively prodominant, then he 
attains the taintless worlds of those who know the 
highest (entities). 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.14 Yada, when; deha-bhrt, an embodied one, the 
soul; yati, undergoes; pralayam, death; sattve 
pravrddhe, while sattva is predominant; tu, 
exclusively; [Tu is used to exclude rajas and 
tamas.-S.] tada, then; pratipadyate, he attains, i.e. 
gains; the amalan, tainless, stainless; lokan, worlds; 
[The worlds of Brahma, etc., which are free from 
the impurity of predominance either of rajas or 
tamas.] uttamavidam, of those who know the 
highest, i.e. of those who have known the 
principles-mahat and the rest. 
14.15 When one dies while rajas predominates, he 
is born among people attached to activity. 
Similarly, when one dies while tamas 
predominates, he takes birth among the stupid 
species. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.15 Pralayam gatva, when one does; rajasi, while 
the quality of rajas predominates; jayate, he is born; 
karma-sangisu, among people attached to activity, 
among human beings having attachment to work. 
Tatha, similarly, in that very way; pralinah, when 
one dies; tamasi, while tamas predominates; jayate, 
he takes birth; mudha-yonisu, among the stupid 
species, such as animals etc. A summary of the idea 
of the preceding (three) verses is being stated: 
14.16 They say that the result of good work is pure 
and is born of sattva. But the result of rajas is 
sorrow; the result of tamas is ignorance. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.16 Ahuh, they, the wise persons, say; that 
phalam, the result; sukrtasya, of good; karmanah, 
work, i.e. acts having the sattva quality; is verily 
nirmalam, pure; and is sattvikam, born of sattva. 
Tu, but; phalam, the result; rajasah, of rajas, i.e. of 
acts that have the qualitty of rajas-for the topic 
relates to actions; is duhkham, sorrow. In 
accordance with its cause, the result too is indeed 
sorrow, a product of rajas. So also ajnanam, 
ignorance; is, as before, (the result) tamasah, of 
tamas, of unrighteous acts that have the quality of 
tamas. What else results from the qualities? 
14.17 From sattva is born knowledge [Knowledge 
acquired through the sense-organs.], and from 
rajas, verily, avarice. From tamas are born 
inadvertence and delusion as also ignorance, to be 
sure. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.17 Sattvat, from sattva, when it predominates; 
sanjayate, is born; jnanam, knowledge; and rajasah, 
from rajas; is verily born lobhah, avarice. Tamasah, 
from tamas; bhavatah, are born; both pramada mohau, in-advertence and delusion; as also 
ajnanam, ignorance [Absence of discrimination.]; 
eva ca, to be sure. Further, 
14.18 People who conform to sattva go higher up; 
those who conform to rajas stay in the middle; 
those who conform to tamas, who conform to the 
actions of the lowest quality, go down. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.18 Sattvasthah, people who conform to sattva, to 
the actions of sattva quality; gacchanti, go, are 
born; undhavam, higher up, in the worlds of gods 
and others. Rajasah, those who conform to rajas; 
[Those who are endowed with sense-knowledge 
and actions consequent on the preponderance of 
rajas.] tisthanti, stay, are born; madhye, in the
middle, among human beings. Tamasah, those 
who conform to tamas, jaghanya-gunavrttasthah 
[A variant reading is vrttisthah.-Tr.], who conform 
to actions of the lowest quality of tamas, those who 
are attached to its actions-sleep, laziness, etc.-, the 
foolish; gacchanti, go; adhah, down, (i.e.) they are 
born among cattle etc. The association, owing to 
the false ignorance in the form of 'being seated in 
Nature', that an individual soul has with the 
gunas-in the form of happiness, sorrow and 
delusion, and which are matters of experience in 
such ways as, 'I am happy,' 'I am sorrowful,' 'I am 
ignorant,'-that (association) is the cause of the 
individual soul's mundane existence characterized 
by coming to have births in good and bad species. 
This was stated briefly in the earlier chapter. 
Elaborating that here in the text beginning with, 
'the qualities, viz sattva, rajas and tamas, born of 
Nature' (5), the Lord has said that the nature of the 
qualities, the conduct conforming to the qualities, 
and the power to bind that the qualities have 
through actions conforming to them, and also the 
course of a person under the bondage, of 
behaviour conforming to the qualities,-all this is 
false knowledge; it has ignorance as its root and is 
the cause of bondage. Now, it is necessary to state 
that Liberation follows from right knowledge. 
Hence the Lord says: 
14.19 When the witness sees none other than the 
qualities as the agent, and knows that which is 
superior [i.e. different from.] to the qualities, he 
attains My nature. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.19 Yada, when; drasta, the witness, after 
becoming illumined; anupasyati, sees; na anyam, 
none other; gunebhyah, than the qualities that have 
transformed into the shape of body, orgnas and 
objects; kartaram,as the agent-(i.e.) he sees thus 
that the qualities themselves, in all their modes, are 
the agents of all activities; ca, and; vetti, knows; 
that which, standing as the witness of the activities 
of the qualities, is param, superior; gunebhyah, to 
the qualities; sah, he, the witness; adhigacchati, 
attains; madbhavam, My nature. How does he 
attain? That is being stated: 
14.20 Having transcended these three qualities 
which are the origin of the body, the embodied 
one, becoming free from birth, death, old age and 
sorrows, experiences Immortality. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.20 Atitya, having transcended, having gone 
beyond-even while living; etan, these; trin, three; 
gunan, qualities as have been described, which 
constitute the limiting adjunct Maya; and 
dehasamudbhavan, which are the origin of the 
body, which are the seed of the birth of the body; 
dehi, the embodied one, the enlightened one; 
vimuktah, becoming free-even in this life; janma mrtyu-jara-duhkhaih, from birth death, old age 
and sorrow; asnute, experiences; [Some translate 
this as 'attains'.-Tr.] amrtam, Immortality. In this 
way he attains My nature. This is the idea. Getting 
a clue to a question from the statement that one 
experiences Immortality, even in this life, by going 
beyond the qualities 
14.21 Arjuna said -- O Lord, by what signs is one 
(known) who has gone beyond these three 
qualities? What is his behaviour, and how does he 
transcend these three qualities? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.21 Prabho, O Lord; kaih, by what; lingaih, signs; 
bhavati, is one (known); atitah, who has gone 
beyond; etan, these; trin, three; gunan, qualities 
that have been explained? Kim, what; is his acarah, 
behaviour; ca, and; katham, how, in what way; 
ativartate, does he transcend; [Ast. adds here, 
'atitya vartate, (in what way) does he exist after 
transcending (the three qualities)?'-Tr.] etan, these;
trin, three; gunan, qualities? In this verse the signs 
of one who has gone beyond the qualities, and the 
means of transcending them have been asked by 
Arjuna. By way of replying to the two questions, 
the Lord said: 'As for the question, 'With what 
sings does one who has gone beyond the qualities 
become endowed with?", listen to them:' 
14.22 The Blessed Lord said -- O son of Pandu, he 
neither dislikes illumination (knowledge), activity 
and delusion when they appear, nor does he long 
for them when they disappear. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.22 Na dvesti, he neither dislikes these; 
prakasam, illumination (knowledge), an effect of 
sattva; pravrttim, activity, an effect of rajas; and 
moham, delusion, an effect of tamas; 
sampravrttani, when they appear, when they fully 
emerge in the form of objects (of experience)-. 'In 
me has arisen a perception which is a result of 
tamas; thereby I have become deluded'; so also, 'In 
me has risen (the inclination to) action which is 
painful and is born of rajas. By that rajas I have 
been actuated, carried away from my own nature. 
This is a matter of sorrow to me that there has been 
a deviation from my own nature'; similarly, 'The 
quality of sattva, in the form of illumination that is 
knowledge, binds me by attributing discrimination 
to me and making me attached to happiness'-(by 
thinking) in these ways one dislikes them because 
of his being not fully enlightened. The person who 
has transcended the qualities does not dislike them 
in this manner. Unlike a person having sattva etc., 
who longs for the effects of sattva etc. which 
withdraw themselves after becoming manifest to 
him, the person who has gone beyond the qualities 
na kanksati, does not long for them in that way; 
nivrttani, when they disappear. This is the idea. 
This is not an indication that can be perceived by 
others. What then? Since this characteristic is 
perceivable to oneself, it is merely subjective. For 
dislike or longing, which is a subjective experience 
of a person, is not seen by another. Now, then, the 
Lord gives the reply to the question, 'What is the 
behaviour of one who has gone beyond the 
qualities?': 
14.23 He who, sitting like one indifferent, is not 
distracted by the three qualities; he who, thinking 
that the qualities alone act, remains firm and surely 
does not move; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.23 He, the Self-realized monk, yah, who; asinah, 
sitting; udasinavat, like one indifferent-as an 
indifferent man sides with nobody, similarly, this 
one, set on the path leading to the transcendence of 
the qualities; na, is not; vicalyate, distracted from 
the state of Knowledge arising out of 
discrimination; gunaih, by the qualities. This point 
is being clarified as such: Yah, he who; thinking iti, 
that; gunah, the qualities, which have trasnformed 
into body, organs and objects; vartante, act on one 
another; avatisthati, remains firm-avatisthati 
(instead of avatisthate) is used in the Parasmaipada 
to avoid a break in the metre, or there is different 
reading, 'yah anutisthati, who acts'-;[His apparent 
activity consists in the mere continuance of actions 
which have been subjectively sublated through 
enlightenment.] and an, does not; ingate, move; 
i.e., becomes eva, surely settled in his own nature-. 
14.24 He to whom sorrow and happiness are alike, 
who is established in his own Self, to whom a lump 
of earth, iron and gold are the same, to whom the 
agreeable and the disagreeable are the same, who 
is wise, to whom censure and his own praise are 
the same; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.24 Moreover, sama-duhkha-sukhah, he to 
whom sorrow and happiness are alike;svasthah, 
who is established in his own Self, tranquil; sama losta-asma-kancanah, to whom a lump of earth, 
iron and gold are the same; tulya-priya-apriyah, to 
whom the agreeable and the disagreeable are the 
same; dhirah, who is wise; tulya-ninda-atma-
samstutih, to whom, to which monk, censure and 
his own praise are the same-. 
14.25 He who is the same under honour and 
dishonour, who is equally disposed both towards 
the side of the friend and of the foe, who has 
renounced all enterprise,-he is said to have gone 
beyond the qualities. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.25 Further, tulyah, he who is the same, 
unperturbed; mana-apamanayoh, under honour 
and dishonour; tulyah, who is equally disposed; 
mitra-ari-paksayoh, both towards the side of the 
friend and of the foe-although from their own 
standpoint some may be unattached, still, in others' 
view they may appear to be siding either with 
friends or foes; hence it is said, 'equally disposed 
both towards the side of the friend and of the foe'; 
sarva-arambha-parityagi, who has renounced all 
enterprise (-those which are undertaken are 
arambhah, actions intended for seen or unseen 
results-), i.e. who is apt to give up all undertakings, 
who has given up all actions other than those 
needed merely for the maintenance of the body; 
sah, he; ucyate, is said to have; gunatitah, gone 
beyond the qualities. The disciplines leading to the 
state of transcendence of the qualities, which have 
been stated (in the verses) beginning from 'he who, 
sitting like one indifferent,' and ending with 'he is 
said to have gone beyond the qualities,' have to be 
practised by a monk, a seeker of Liberation, so long 
as they are to be achieved through effort. But when 
they become firmly ingrained, they become the 
indications, perceivable to himself, of a monk who 
has transcended the qualities. Now the Lord gives 
the reply to the question, 'And how does he 
transcend the qualties?' 
14.26 And he who serves Me through the 
unswerving Yoga of Devotion, he, having gone 
beyond these qualities, qualifies for becoming 
Brahman. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.26 And he-be he a monk or a man of action (rites 
and duties)-, yah, who; sevate, serves; mam, Me, 
God, Narayana residing in the hearts of all beings; 
avyabhicarena, through the unswerving-that 
which never wavers-; bhakti-yogena, Yoga of 
Devotion-devotion [Bhakti (devotion), supreme 
Love, through which one becomes united (with 
God) is yoga.] itself being the Yoga-; sah, he; 
samatitya, having transcended; etan, these; gunan, 
qualities as described; kalpate, qualifies, i.e. 
becomes fit; brahma-bhuyaya,-bhuyah is the same 
as bhavanam-, for becoming Brahman, for 
Liberation. How this is so is being stated: 
14.27 For I am the Abode of Brahman-the 
indestructible and immutable, the eternal, the 
Dharma and absolute Bliss. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
14.27 Hi, for; aham, I, the inmost Self; am the 
pratistha brahmanah, Abode-that in which 
something abides is pratistha-of Brahman which is 
the supreme Self. Of Brahman of what kind? 
Amrtasya, of that which is indestructible; 
avyayasya, of that which is immutable; and 
sasvatasya, of that which is eternal; dharmasya, of 
that which is the Dharma, realizable through the 
Yoga of Jnana which is called dharma (virtue); and 
aikantikasya sukhasya, of that which is the 
absolute, unfailing Bliss by nature. Since the 
inmost Self is the abode of the supreme Self-which 
by nature is immortal etc.-, therefore, through 
perfect Knowledge it (the former) is realized with 
certainty to be the supreme Self. This has been 
stated in, 'he qualifies for becoming Brahman'. The 
purport is this: Indeed, that power of God through 
which Brahman sets out, comes forth, for the 
purpose of favouring the devotees, etc., that power 
which is Brahman Itself, am I. For, a power and the 
possesser of that power are non-different. Or, 
brahman means the conditioned Brahman, since It 
(too,) is referred to by that word. 'Of that Brahman, 
I Myself, the unconditioned Brahman-and none 
else-am the Abode.' (The abode of Brahman) of 
what qualities? Of that which is immortal; of that 
which has the quality of deathlessness; of that 
which is immutable; so also, of that which is the 
eternal; which is the dharma having the 
characteristics of steadfastness in Knowledge; of 
that which is the absolute, unquestionably certain 
Bliss born of that (steadfastness);-'I am the Abode' 
is understood. 
15.1 The Blessed Lord said -- They say that the 
peepul Tree, which has its roots upward and the 
branches downward, and of which the Vedas are 
the leaves, is imperishable. He who realizes it is 
knower of the Vedas. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.1 Urdhva-mulam, that which has its roots 
upwards:- Brahman, possessed of the unmanifest 
power in the form of Maya, is referred to by the 
word 'upward' because of Its subtleness in point of 
time by virtue of Its being the Cause, and also 
because of Its eternality and vastness; and That is 
the root (mulam) of this world. The Tree of the 
World which is such, is urdhva-mulam. This 
accords with the Upanisadic text, 'This has its roots 
above and branches below' (Ka. 2.6.1). In the 
Purana also we have: It sprouts from the Root in 
the form of the Unmanifest; it grows through the 
sturdiness of that very One. And it has abundance 
of intelligence as its trunk, and the appertures of 
the organs as the hollows. The great elements are 
its boughs [A.G. takes the word visakha (boughs) 
in the sense of stambha, perhaps meaning the 
aerial roots.-Tr.]; so also, it has the objects of 
perception as its leaves. It has virtue and vice as its 
beautiful flowers, and happiness and sorrow are 
the fruits it bears. This eternal Tree presided over 
by Brahman is a means of livelihood to all 
creatures. And this verily is the resort of Brahman 
[Or, etat brahma-vanam means: This Tree has 
Brahman as its object of adoration, its support. For, 
the world has nothing but Brahman as its support.] 
in it Brahman dwells for ever. Having felled and 
split this Tree with the great sword of Knowledge, 
and then attaining the bliss of the Self, one does not 
return from that (bliss).' (Cf. Mbh. As. 47.12-15.) 
That Tree which has its roots upwards and is 
constituted by the enchantment of mundane 
existence, and adhah-sakham, which has the 
branches downwards-mahat, [See under 7.4.-Tr.] 
egoism, subtle elements, etc. are its branches 
(sakhah), as it were, extending downwards 
(adhah); so, it has its branches downwards-; that 
Tree with its branches downwards, which does not 
(a) last (stha) even for the morrow (svah), is 
asvatthah (lit. Peepul tree). Ahuh, they say; that the 
asvatthah, Peepul Tree, undergoing destruction 
every moment; is avyayam, imperishable, and 
constituted by the enchantments of mundane 
existence. Having been in existence from time 
without beginning, that Tree of the World is 
imperishable. It is, indeed, will known as the 
sustainer of the beginningless and ceaseless series 
of bodies etc. They call that the imperishable. Of 
that very Tree of the World here is another 
qualification: Yasya, that Tree of the World of 
which; chandamsi-chandas being derived in the 
sense of covering (protecting)-, the Vedas in the 
form of Rk, Yajus and Sama; are the parnani, 
leaves, as it were. As leaves serve as protectors of a 
tree, so the Vedas serve as the protectors of the 
world; for they reveal what are virtue and vice as 
also their causes and results. Yah, he who; veda, 
knows; tam, that-the Tree of the World along with 
its root, as has been explained; sah, he; is a vedavit, 
knower of the Vedas, i.e. versed in the meaning of 
the Vedas. Since, apart from this Tree of the World 
along with its root, not even an iota of any other 
thing remains to be known, therefore he who 
knows the purport of the Vedas is omniscient. In 
this way the Lord euligizes the knowledge of the 
Tree together with its root. An imagery of the other 
parts of that very Tree of the World is being 
presented: 
15.2 The branches of that (Tree), extending down wards and upwards, are strengthened by the 
qualities and have sense-objects as their shoots. 
And the roots, which are followed by actions, 
spread down-wards in the human world 
[According to A.G. and M.S. manusya-loke means 
a body distinguished by Brahminhood etc.]. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.2 Sakhah, the branches, as it were; tasya, of that 
Tree; prasrtah, extending; adhah, downwards, 
from the human beings to the immobile (trees etc.); 
ca, and; urdhvam, upwards, upto Brahma beginning from the Creator of the Cusmos to 
Dharma (Death) [According to A.G. 'human 
beings' stands for the world of human beings, and 
'Brahma ' for the 'world of Brahma' (Satva-loka). So 
Dharma may mean the 'world of Death' (pitr loka).-Tr.], which, 'in accordance with their work 
and in conformity with their knowledge' (Ka.2.2.7), 
are the results of knowledge and actions; are 
guna-pravrddhah, strengthened, made stout, by 
the qualities sattva, rajas and tamas, which are 
their materials; and visaya-pravalah, have the 
sense-objects as their shoots. The sense-objects 
(sound etc.) sprout, as it were, like new leaves from 
the branches (bodies etc.) which are the results of 
actions. Thereby the branches are said to have 
sense-objects as their shoots. The supreme Root, 
the material cause of the Tree of the World, has 
been stated earlier. And now, the latent 
impressions of attraction, repulsion, etc. born of the 
results of action are the subsidiary roots, as it were, 
which grow later on and become the cause of 
involvement in righteousness and and 
unrighteousness. And those mulani, roots; karma anubandhini, which are followed by actions; anu santatani, spread, enter; adhah, downwards, as 
compared with the world of gods; manusya-loke, 
into the world of human beings particularly-for it 
is well known that (only) here men have 
competence for rites and duties. They (these roots) 
are said to be karma-anubandhini since actions 
(karma) that are characterized as righteous and 
unrighteous follow as their product (anubandha), 
(i.e.) succeed the rise of those (attraction, repulsion, 
etc.). 
15.3 Its form is not perceived here in that way; nor 
its end, nor beginning, nor continuance, After 
felling this Peepul whose roots are well developed, 
with the strong sword of detachment-; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.3 But, asya, its-of this Tree of the World which 
has been described; rupam, form, as it has been 
presented; na, is not at all; upalabhyate, perceived; 
iha, here; tatha, in that way. For, being like a 
dream, water in a mirage, jugglery, an imaginary 
city seen in the sky, it is by nature destroyed no 
sooner than it is seen. Therefore, na, there exists 
neither; its antah, end, limit, termination; so also, 
neither; its beginning. It is not comprehended by 
anyone that it comes into existence beginning from 
any definite point. Its sampratistha, continuance, 
the middle state, too, is not perceived by anyone. 
Chittva, after felling, uprooting, together with its 
seeds; enam, this, above described; asvattham, 
Peepul, the Tree of the World; suvirudha-mulam, 
whose roots (mula) are well (su) developed 
(virudham); drdhena, with the strong-hardened by 
a resolute mind directed towards the supreme Self, 
and sharpened on the stone of repeated practice of 
discrimination; asanga-sastrena, sword of 
detachment-detachment means turn ing away from 
the desire for progeny, wealth and the worlds; with 
that sword of detachment-. 
15.4 Thereafter, that State has to be sought for, 
going where they do not return again: I take refuge 
in that Primeval Person Himself, from whom has 
ensued the eternal Manifestation. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.4 Tatah, thereafter; tat, that; padam, State of 
Visnu; parimargitavyam, has to be sought for, i.e. 
realized; gatah, going, entering; yasmin, where, 
into which State; they na, do not; nivartanti, return; 
bhuyah, again, for worldly life. As to how It is to 
be sought for, the Lord says: Prapadye, I take 
refuge; tam, in that; adyam, Primeval-existing from 
the beginning; purusam, Person, who has been 
mentioned by the word State; eva, Himself. The 
search has to be carried on thus, i.e., by taking 
refuge in Him. Who is that Person? That is being 
stated: Yatah, from whom, from which Person; 
prasrta, has ensued, like jugglery from a magician; 
purani, the eternal; pravrttih, Manifestation, the 
magic Tree of the World. What kind of persons 
reach that State? This is being answered: 
15.5 The wise ones who are free from pride and 
non-discrimination, who have conquered the evil 
of association, [Hatred and love arising from 
association with foes and friends.] who are ever 
devoted to spirituality, completely free from 
desires, free from the dualities called happiness 
and sorrow, reach that undecaying State. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.5 Amudhah, the wise ones, who are devoid of 
delusion; who are nirmana-mohah, free from (nir) 
pride (mana) and non-discrimination (moha); jita sanga-dosah, who have conquered (jita) the evil 
(dosa) of association (sanga)-association itself 
being the evil; those who have conquered that; 
adhyatma-nityah, who are ever devoted to 
spirituality, ever engaged in reflecting on the 
nature of the supreme Self; engrossed in that; 
[Engrossed in hearing, reflecting and meditating 
on the Self.] vinivrtta-kamah, who are completely 
(vi) free from (nivrtta) desires (kamah), whose 
desires have completely gone away without trace 
(ni), the men of self-control, the monks; vimuktah, 
who are free from, have got rid of; dvandvaih, the 
dualities-likes, dislikes, etc.; sukha-duhkha-
sanjnaih, called happiness and sorrow; gacchanti, 
reach; tat, that; avyayam, undecaying; padam, 
State, as has been described above. The very State 
is being elaborated again: 
15.6 Neither the sun nor the moon nor fire 
illumines That. That is My supreme Abode, 
reaching which they do not return. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.6 Na suryah, niether the sun-though possessed 
of the power of illumining everything; so also, na 
sasankah, nor the moon; na pavakah, nor even fire; 
bhasayate, illumines; tat, That [-this (word) refers 
to the remote word dhama (Abode) at the end of 
the verse-], that Abode which is of the nature of 
light. That abode, the State of Visnu, gatva, 
reaching, attaining; yat, which; they na, do not; 
nivartante, return, and which the sun etc. do not 
illumine; tat, that; is mama, My, Visnu's; paramam, 
supreme; dhama, Abode, State. Objection: It has 
been said, 'reaching which they do not return'. Is it 
not well known that all goings end, verily, in 
returning, and unions are followed by separations? 
How is it said that there is no return for those who 
come to that Abode? Reply: As to that, listen to the 
reason: 
15.7 It is verily a part of Mine which, becoming the 
eternal individual soul in the region of living 
beings, draws (to itself) the organs which have the 
mind as their sixth, and which abide in Nature. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.7 It is eva, verily amsah, a part, portion, limb, 
fragment-these are all synonymous; mama, of 
mine, of the supreme Self; [Here Ast. adds 
'narayanasya, of Narayana':-Tr.] which, jiva-bhutah 
sanatanah, becoming the eternal individual soul, 
will known as the enjoyer and agent; jiva-loke, in 
the region of living beings, (i.e.) in the world-. As 
the sun (reflected) in water is a part of the (actual) 
sun, and goes to the sun itself and does not return 
when the water, the cause of the reflection, is 
removed, so also even this part becomes similarly 
united with that very Self; or, as space enclosed in 
a pot etc., delimited by such adjuncts as the pot 
etc., being a part of Space does not return after 
being united with Space when the cause (of 
limitation), viz pot etc., is destroyed. This being so, 
it has been rightly stated, 'by reaching which they 
do not return.' Objection: How can the partless 
supreme Self have any limb, fragment or part? If it 
has limbs, then there arises the contingency of Its 
becoming destroyed through the dismemberment 
of the limbs! Reply: This fault does not arise, since 
Its fragment, which is delimited by an adjunct 
arising out of ignorance, is imagined to be a part, 
as it were. And this idea has been fully explained 
in the chapter (13) dealing with the 'field'. How 
that individual soul, imagined as a part of Mine, 
enters into the world and leaves the body are being 
stated: Karsati, it draws to itself; indriyani, the 
(sense-) organs-ear etc.; manah-sasthani, which 
have the mind as their sixth; and prakrti-sthani, 
which abide in Nature, which are located in their 
respective spheres such as the orifice of the ear etc. 
When (does it draw the organs)? 
15.8 When the master leaves it and even when he 
assumes a body, he departs taking these, as wind 
(carries away) odours from their receptacles. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.8 Yat, when; isvarah, the master of the aggregate 
of the body etc., the individual soul; utkramati, 
leaves the body, then he draws. Thus, the second 
quarter of the verse is treated first for the sake of 
consistency. [When the soul leaves the body, then 
it draws the organs (see previous verses) from that 
body. In this way, the second quarter of the present 
verse is treated first, because going to another body 
follows the leaving of the earlier one.-M.S.] Ca api, 
and even; yat, when; it avapnoti, assumes a body 
other than the earlier one; then, grahitva, taking; 
etani, these, the organs with the mind as their sixth; 
samyati, he leaves, goes away totally [Samyak, 
totally-without returning in any way to the earlier 
body.-M.S.] Like what? In reply the Lord says: iva, 
as; vayuh, the wind (carries away); gandhan, 
odours; asayat, from their receptacles-flowers etc. 
Which, again, are those (organs)? 
15.9 This one enjoys the objects by presiding over 
the ear, eyes, skin and tongue as also the nose and 
the mind.
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.9 Seated in the body, it upasevate, enjoys; 
visayan, the objects-sound etc.; adhisthaya, by 
presiding over; srotram, the ear; caksuh, eyes; 
sparsanam, skin, the organ of touch; rasanam, 
tongue; eva ca, as also; the ghranam, nose; and 
manah, the mind, the sixth-(presiding over) each 
one of them along with its (corresponding) organ. 
15.10 Persons who are diversely deluded do not 
see it even when it is leaving or residing (in this 
body), or experiencing, or in association with the 
qualities. Those with the eye of knowledge see. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.10 Thus, the embodied soul, utkarmantam, 
when it is leaving the body-the body that was 
assumed earlier; or sthitam, while residing in the 
(present) body; or bhunjanam, experiencing sound 
etc.; or guna-anvitam, in association with, i.e. 
identified with, the qualities called happiness, 
sorrow and delusion-even when, under such 
conditions, this one comes very much within the 
range of cognition; vimudhah, the persons who are 
diversely deluded as a result of their hearts being 
forcibly attracted by the enjoyments of seen and 
unseen objects; na, do not; anu-pasyanti, see. And 
the Lord regrets this saying, 'Alas! How sorrowful 
this is!' Those others, again, jnana-caksusah, who 
have the eye of knowledge, [Jnana-caksuh means 
the scriptures supported by reasoning, which are 
the means of knowledge.] who have the insight of 
under-standing which has arisen from the valid 
means of knowledge, i.e., those having a clear 
vision; pasyanti, see this one. 
15.11 And the yogis who are diligent see this one as 
existing in themselves. The non-discriminating 
ones who lack self-control do not see this one though (they be) diligent. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.11 And some, however, yoginah, the yogis of 
concentrated minds; yatantah, who are diligent; 
pasyanti, see; evam, this one, the Self under 
discussion; as avasthitam, existing; atmani, in 
themselves, in their own intelligence. They realize, 
'I am This.' Acetasah, the non-discriminating ones; 
akrta-atmanah, who lack self-control, who have not 
purified themselves through austerity and control 
of the organs, who have not desisted from bad 
conduct, who are not tranquil and are proud by 
nature; na, do not; pasyanti, see; enam, this one; 
api, though; (they be) yatantah, diligent-even 
though they be striving with the help of the valid 
means of knowledge such as the scriptures. With a 
view to speaking of the all-pervasiveness of the 
State and the fact of Its being the substratum of all 
empirical dealings, the Lord speaks in brief 
through the following four verses of the divine 
manifestations of that State which the light of fire, 
sun, etc. do not illumine though they are the 
illuminators of everything; and reaching which the 
aspirants of Liberation do not return again towards 
mundane existence; and of which State the 
individual souls, owing to their conformity with 
the diversity of limiting adjuncts, are parts, just as 
spaces enclosed in pot etc. are 'parts' of Space: 
15.12 That light in the sun which illumines the 
whole world, that which is in the moon, and that 
which is in fire,-know that light to be Mine. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.12 Yat, that which is; aditya-gatam, in the sun, 
which abides in the sun;-what is that-the tejah, 
light, brilliance, radiance; which bhasayate, 
illumines, reveals; akhilam, the whole, entire; jagat, 
world; yat, that ulluminating light which is; 
candramasi, in the moon; ca, and yat, which is; 
agnau, in fire, the carrier of oblations; viddhi, 
know; tat, that; tejah, light; to be mamakam, Mine. 
That light belong to Me who am Visnu. Or: The 
light that is Consciousness, which is in the sun, 
which is in the moon, and which is in fire, know 
that light to be Mine. That light belongs to Me who 
am Visnu. Objection; Is it not that the light that is 
Consciousness exists equally in the moving and the 
non-moving? Such being the case, why is this 
particular mention, 'That light in the sun 
which...,'etc? Reply: This defect does not arise, 
because, owing to the abundance of the sattva 
quality, there can be an abundane [Ast. reads 
avistaratva (amplitude) in place of adhikya.-Tr.] (of 
Consciousness). Since in the sun etc. the sattva is 
very much in evidence, is greatly brilliant, 
therefore there is an abundance of the light (of 
Consciousness) in them alone. And so it (sun etc.) 
is specially mentioned. But it is not that it 
(Consciousness) is abundant only there. Indeed, as 
in the world, a face, though in the same position, is 
not reflected in wood, a wall, etc., but in a mirror 
etc. it is reflected according to the degree in which 
they are more and more transparent, so is it here. 
Further, 
15.13 And entering the earth I sustain the beings 
through (My) power; and nourish all the plants by 
becoming Soma [According to S. and most other 
translators, Soma means the moon.-Tr.] which is of 
the nature of sap. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.13 Ca, and; avisya, entering; gam, the earth; 
aham, I; dharayami, sustain; bhutani, the beings, 
the world; ojasa, through (My) power, the power 
that belongs to God and is free from passing and 
attachment, (and) which has penetrated the earth 
to support it, and owing to which the heavy earth 
does not fall and does not crumble. There is a 
similar mantra: 'By which the heaven is made 
mighty, and the earth firm' (Tai. Sam. 4.1.8.5), and 
also, 'He supported the earth' (op.cit., 4.1.8.3), etc. 
Hence, it has rightly been said, 'Entering the earth I 
sustain the moving and non-moving beings.' 
Moreover, pusnami, I nourish, I make healthy and 
full of the sweet flavour of juices; sarvah, all; 
osadhih, the plants-paddy, barley, etc.; bhutva, by 
becoming; somah, Soma; rasatmakah, which is of 
the nature of sap. Soma consists of all the juices; it 
is the source of all juices. Indeed, it nourishes all 
plants by infusing its own juice into everything. 
Besides, 
15.14 Taking the form of Vaisvanara and residing 
in the bodies of creatures, I, in association with 
Prana and Apana, digest the four kinds of food.
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.14 Bhutva, taking the form of; vaisvanarah, 
Vaisvanara, the fire in the stomach, mentioned in 
such Upanisadic texts as, 'This fire that is within 
man and digests the food (that is eaten) is 
Vaisvanara' (Br. 5.9.1); becoming that Vaisvanara, 
and asritah, residing in, entering; deham, the 
bodies; praninam, of creatures, of living beings; 
aham, I Myself; prana-apana-samayuktah, in 
association [i.e. kindled, inflamed, by Prana and 
Apana.] with Prana and Apana; [Prana-that vital 
force which goes upward and has its seat really in 
the heart (cf. Tai. Br. 3.10.8.5), but it said to be 
located at the tip of the nose since its presence is 
directly felt there. Apana-that vital force which 
goes downward, below the navel, and has its seat 
in the organs of excertion.-Tr.] pacami, digest; the 
caturvidham, four kinds of; annam, food-those that 
are eaten by masticating, swallowing, sucking and 
licking. The eater is the fire called Vaisvanara, and 
the eaten is the food Soma. One who looks upon all 
that there is as being these two, fire and Soma, is 
not affected by the impurity of food. Further, 
15.15 And I am seated in the hearts of all. From Me 
are memory, knowledge and their loss. I alone am 
the object to be known through all the Vedas; I am 
also the originator of the Vedanta, and I Myself am 
the knower of the Vedas. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.15 And aham, I, as the Self; san-nivistah, am 
seated; hrdi, in the hearts, in the intellects; 
sarvasya, of all creatures. Therefore, with regard to 
all the creatures, mattah, from Me, from the Self; 
are Smrtih, memory; jnanam, knowledge; and their 
apohanam, loss. The knowledge and memory of 
these creatures who perform good deeds come 
from Me in accordance with the good deeds; 
similarly, the loss, deterioration, of memory and 
knowledge of those who perform evil deeds comes 
from Me in accordance with the evil deeds. Aham 
eva, I alone, the supreme Self; am the vedyah, 
object to be known; sarvaih, through all; vedaih, 
the Vedas. I am also the vedanta-krt, the originator 
of the Vedanta, i.e., the source of the traditional 
school of the teachings of Vedanta; and aham eva, I 
Myself; am the veda-vit, knower of the Vedas, the 
knower of the teachings of the Vedas. In the verses 
beginning with, 'That light in the sun which...' (12), 
etc. have been stated briefly the majesty of God, the 
Lord called Naravana, which arise from special 
limiting adjuncts. Now then, the succeeding verses 
are begun with a view to determining the real 
nature of that very Lord as the Unconditioned and 
Absolute, by distinguishing Him from the limiting 
adjuncts, (viz) the mutable and the immutable. In 
that connection, after dividing into three parts [The 
two limiting adjuncts-the mutable and the 
immutable-, and the supreme Self.] all the 
teachings of the preceding and the immediately 
succeeding chapters, the Lord says: 
15.16 There are these two persons in the world-the 
mutable and the immutable. The mutable consists 
of all things; the one existing as Maya is called the 
immutable. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.16 There are imau, these; dvau, two-grouped 
separately; purusau, persons, so called [Persons-so 
called only figuratively, since they are the limiting 
adjuncts of the supreme Person.]; loke in the world; 
the ksarah, mutable-one group consists of the 
perishable; the other person is the aksarah, 
immutable, opposite of the former, the power of 
God called Maya, which is the seed of the origin of 
the person called the mutable. That which is the 
receptacle of the impressions of desires, actions, 
etc. of countless transmigrating creatures is called 
the immutable person. Who are those persons? The 
Lord Himself gives the answer: Ksarah, the 
mutable; consists of sarvani, all; bhutani, things, 
i.e. the totality of all mutable things. Kutasthah is 
the one existing as Maya: Kuta means a heap; 
kutasthah, is that which exists like a heap. Or, kuta 
is maya, deception, falsehood, crookedness, which 
are synonymous; that which exists in the diverse 
forms of maya etc. is the kutasthah. It is ucyate, 
called; the aksarah, immutable, because, owing to 
the countless seeds of worldly existence, it does not 
perish. 
15.17 But different is th supreme Person who is 
spoken of as the transcendental Self, who, 
permeating the three worlds, upholds (them), and 
is the imperisahble God. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.17 Tu, but; anyah, different, entirely contrary in 
characteristics from these; is the uttamah, supreme, 
most excellent; purusah, Person, who is different in 
characteristics from these-the mutable and the 
immutable-, untouched by the mutable and the 
immutable limiting adjuncts, and is by nature 
eternal, pure, conscious and free; udahrtah, spoken 
of in the Upanisads; iti, as; the paramatma, 
supreme Self; He is paramah, supreme, as 
compared with the selves like body etc. created by 
ignorance, and is the atma, Self, the inmost 
Consciousness of all beings. Hence He is the 
supreme Self. He Himself is being specially 
described: yah, who, by dint of His own active 
power inhering in the energy that is Maya; 
[Caitanya, consciousness, itself is the bala (energy); 
the sakti (active power) therein is Maya. Through 
that He upholds.] avisya, permeating; loka-trayam, 
the three worlds-called Bhuh (Earth), Bhuvah, 
(Intermediate Space) and Svah (Heaven); bibharti, 
upholds (them) by merely being present in His 
own nature. (And He) is the avyayah, 
imperishable; isvarah, God, the Omniscient One 
called Narayana, who is the Lord by nature. This 
name-the supreme Person-of God as described is 
well known. Showing that the name is apt by 
virtue of its etymological significance, the Lord 
reveals Himself saying, 'I am the unsurpassable 
God': 
15.18 Since I am transcendental to the mutable and 
above even the immutable, hence I am well known 
in the world and in the Vedas as the supreme 
Person. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.18 Yasmat, since; aham, I; am atitah, 
transcendental; ksaram, to the mutable-I am 
beyond the Tree of Maya, called the Peepul Tree, 
which this worldly existence is; and uttamah, 
above, most excellent or the highest; as compared 
with api, even; the akasarat, immutable, which is 
the seed of the Tree of worldly existence; atah, 
hence, by virtue of being the most excellent as 
compared with the mutable and the immutable; 
aham, I; am prathitah, well known; loke, in the 
world; and vede, in the Vedas; as purusottamah, 
the supreme Person. Devoted persons know Me 
thus, and poets also use this name 'Purusottama' in 
their poetry etc.; they extol Me with this name. 
Thereafter, now is stated this result attained by one 
who knows the Self as described: 
15.19 O scion of the Bharata dynasty, he who, 
being free from delusion, knows Me the supreme 
Person thus, he is all-knowing and adores Me with 
his whole being. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.19 Bharata, O scion of the Bharata dynasty; yah, 
he who; asammudhah, being free from delusion; 
janati, knows; mam, Me, God, having the aforesaid 
qualifications; purusottamam, the supreme Person; 
evam, thus, in the way described, as 'I am this 
One'; sah, he; is sarva-vit, all-knowing- he knows 
everything through self-identification with all-, i.e. 
(he becomes) omniscient; and bhajati, adores; mam, 
Me, existing in all things; sarva-bhavena, with his 
whole being, i.e. with his mind fixed on Me as the 
Self of all. Now then, having stated in this chapter 
the knowledge of the real nature of the Lord, 
which has Liberation as its fruit, it is being 
euligized: 
15.20 O sinless one, this most secret scripture has 
thus been uttered by Me. Understanding this, one 
becomes wise and has his duties fulfilled, O scion 
of the Bharata dynasty. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
15.20 This guhyatamam, most secret, i.e. most 
mystical;- what is that?-sastram, scripture-. 
Although the Gita as a whole is spoken of as the 
scripture, still this chapter itself is here referred to 
as such, and this for eulogy as is evident from the 
context. For, not only has the entire meaning of the 
scripture Gita been stated here in brief, but the 
whole purport of the Vedas also has been 
comprehended here. And it has been said, 'He who 
realizes it is a knower of the Vedas' (1), 'I alone am 
the object to be known through all the Vedas' (15). 
(Thus, this most secret scripture) iti uktam, has 
thus been uttered; maya, by Me; anagha, O sinless 
one. O scion of the Bharata dynasty, buddhva, 
under-standing; etat, this, the scripture which has 
the purport as has been revealed; syat, one 
becomes; buddhiman, wise; and krta-krtyah, has 
his duties fulfilled; but not otherwise. The meaning 
is that what-ever a Brahmana has to do as a 
consequence of his special birth (as a Brahmana), 
all that becomes accomplished when the reality of 
the Lord is known. The idea is that nobody's duties 
become fulfilled in any other way. And it has been 
said, 'O son of Prtha, all actions in their totality 
culminate in Knowledge' (4.33). There is also a 
saying from Manu: 'This, verily, is the fulfilment of 
a Brahmana in particular. For, by getting this, a 
twice-born has his duties fulfilled; not otherwise' 
(Ma. Sm. 12.93). Since you have heard from Me this 
truth about the supreme Reality, therefore, O scion 
of the Bharata dynasty, you have achieved your 
Goal! 
16.1 The Blessed Lord said -- Fearlessness, purity of 
mind, persistence in knowledge and yoga, charity 
and control of the external organs, sacrifice, 
(scriptural) study, austerity and recititude; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.1 Abhayam, fearlessness; sattva-samsuddhih, 
purtiy of the mind (sattva), mentally avoiding 
fraud, trickery, falsehood, etc. in dealings, i.e., 
honest behaviour; jnana-yoga-vyavasthitih, 
persistence in knowledge and yoga-jnana means 
knowledge of such subjects as the Self, learnt from 
scriptures and teachers; yoga means making those 
things that have been learnt matters of one's own 
personal experience through concentration by 
means of withdrawl of the organs etc.; persistence, 
steadfastness, in those two, knowledge and yoga;-
this [This-refers to all the three from 'fearlessness' 
to 'persistence in knowledge and yoga'.] is the 
principal divine characteristic which is sattvika 
(born of the sattva quality). That nature which may 
occur in persons competent in their respective 
spheres, [Persons treading the path of Jnana-yoga 
or Karma-yoga have sattvika qualities. Some of the 
qualities mentioned in the first three verses occur 
only in the former, whereas the others are found in 
both or only in the latter.-Tr.]-that is said to be their 
sattvika attribute. Danam, charity, distribution of 
food etc. according to one's ability; and damah, 
control of the external organs-the control of the 
internal organ, santih, will be referred to later; 
yajnah, sacrifices-Agnihotra etc. sanctioned by the 
Vedas, and sacrifices in honour of gods and others 
[Others: Those in honour of the manes, humans 
and other beings. Brahma-yajna, the fifth sacrifice, 
is referred to separately by svadhyaya.] sanctioned 
by the Smrtis: svadhyayah, study of the Rg-veda 
etc. for unseen results; tapah, austerity, those 
concerning the body, etc., which will be stated 
(17.14-16); arjavam, rectitude, straigthforwardness 
at all times-. Further, 
16.2 Non-injury, truthfulness, absence of anger, 
renunciation, control of the internal organ, absence 
of vilification, kindness to creatures, non covetousness, gentleness, modesty, freedom from 
restlessness; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.2 Ahimsa, non-injury, abstaining from giving 
pain to creatures; satyam, truthfulness, speaking of 
things as they are, without unpleasantness and 
prevarication; akrodhah, absence of anger, control 
of anger that might result when offened or assulatd 
by others; tyagah, renunciation, monasticism-for, 
charity has been mentioned earlier; santih, control 
of the internal organ; apaisunam, absence of 
vilification-paisunam means backbiting; its absence 
is apaisunam; daya, kindness; bhutesu, to creatures 
in distress; aloluptvam, non-conveteousness, 
absence of excitement of the organs in the presence 
of objects; mardavam, gentleness, absence of hard heartedness; hrih, modesty;; acapalam, freedom 
from restlessness, absence of unnecessary use of 
organs such as speech, hands and feet-. Besides, 
16.3 Vigour, forgiveness, fortitude, purity, freedom 
from malice, absence of haughtiness-these, O scion 
of the Bharata dynasty, are (the qualties) of one 
born destined to have the divine nature. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.3 Tajah, vigour, not the brightness of the skin; 
ksama, forgiveness, absence of internal 
perturbation when offened or assulated-absence of 
anger has been explained by us as the calming 
down of a perturbed mind; thus, forgiveness and 
absence of anger are distinguished; dhrtih, 
fortitude, a particular function of the mind which 
removes the tedium of the body and organs when 
they become exhausted, and being rejuvenated by 
which the body and organs do not feel any fatigue; 
saucam, purity-is of two kinds: external, with the 
help of earth and water; and internal, the 
cleanliness of mind and intellect, the absence of 
such impurities as trickery, attachment, etc.; purity 
of these two kinds; adrohah, freedom from malice, 
absence of the desire to injure others, absence of 
hatred; na-atimanita, absence of haughtiness-too 
much self-esteem (mana) is atimanah; one having 
that is atimani; its abstract form is atimanita; 
absence of that, na-atimanita, i.e., absence of the 
feeling of one's being too honourable. These 
(qualities) beginning with fearlessness and ending 
with this, O scion of the Bharata dynasty, bhavanti, 
are; (the qualities) abhijatasya, of one destined to 
have;-what kind of nature?-the daivim, divine; 
sampadam, nature-of one destined to have divine 
attributes, of one who is worthy of the excellence of 
the gods, i.e., of one who would be illustrations in 
future. Thereafter, the demoniacal nature is now 
being stated: 
16.4 O son of Prtha, (the attributes) of one destined 
to have the demoniacal nature are religious 
ostentation, pride and haughtiness, [Another 
reading is abhimanah, self-conceit.-Tr.], anger as 
also rudeness and ignorance.
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.4 O son of Prtha, dambhah, religious 
ostentation; darpah, pride arising from wealth, 
relatives, etc.; atimanah, haughtiness, as explained 
earlier; and krodhah, anger; eva ca, as also; 
parusyam, redeness, using unkind words, e.g. to 
speak of a blind person as having eyes, an ugly 
person as handsome, a lowly born man as born of 
aristocracy, and so on; and ajnanam, ignorance, 
non-discriminating knowledge, false conception 
regarding what ought to be and ought not to be 
done; are (the attributes) abhijatasya, of one 
destined to have;-destined for what? in answer the 
Lord says-asurim, demoniacal; sampadam, nature. 
The consequences of these natures are being stated: 
16.5 The divine nature is the Liberation, the 
demoniacal is considered to be for inevitable 
bondage. Do not grieve, O son of Pandu! You are 
destined to have the divine nature. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.5 That which is daivi, divine; sampad, nature; is 
vimoksaya, for Liberation from the bondage of the 
world. The asuri, demoniacal nature; mata, is 
considered to be; nibandhaya, for inevitable 
bondage. So also is the fiendish nature. Now, when 
such a statement was made, the Lord, noticing 
Arjuna having this kind of inner cogitation-'Am I 
endowed with the demoniacal nature, or am I 
endowed with the divine nature?'-, says: ma, do 
not; sacah, grieve, O son of Pandu! Asi, you are; 
abhijatah, destined to have, born with the good 
fortune of having; daivim, the divine; sampadam, 
nature; i.e., you are destined for an illustrious 
future. 
16.6 In this world there are are two (kinds of) 
creation of beings: the divine and the demoniacal. 
The divine has been spoken of elaborately. Hear 
about the demoniacal from Me, O son of Prtha. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.6 Dvau, two, in number; are the (kinds of) 
bhuta-sargau, creation of beings, of men. Sarga is 
derived from srj in the sense of that which is 
created. The persons themselves, who are created 
with the natures of gods and demons, are being 
spoken of as 'two creations of beings', which 
accords with the Upanisadic text, 'There were two 
classes of Prajapati's sons, the gods and the 
demons' (Br. 1.3.1). For, asmin, in this; loke, world, 
all (persons) can rationally be divided into two 
classes. Which are those two creations of beings? 
The answer is, the two are the daiva, divine; eva ca, 
and; the asura, the demoniacal which are being 
discussed. The Lord speaks of the need of restating 
the two that have been already referred to: Daivah, 
the divine creation of beings; proktah, has been 
spoken of; vistarasah, elaborately-in, 'Fearlessness, 
purity of mind,' etc. (1-3). But the demoniacal has 
not been spoken of in extenso. Hence, O son of 
Prtha, srnu, hear of, understand; the asuram, 
demoniacal; me, from Me, from My speech which 
is being uttered in detail, so that this may be 
avoided. Upto the end of the chapter the 
demoniacal nature is being presented as the 
qualities of creatures; for, when this is directly 
perceived, it becomes possible to eschew it: 
16.7 Neither do the demoniacal persons under stand what is to be done and what is not to be 
done; nor does purity, or even good conduct or 
truthfulness exist in them. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.7 Na, niether; do the asurah, demoniacal; janah, 
persons; viduh, understand; pravritim, what is to 
be done with regard to that which is a means to the 
human ends; and nivirttim, what is not to be done, 
the opposite of that (former) and from which 
source of evil one should desist. Nor only do they 
not know what is to be done and what is not to be 
done, na, nor; does saucam, purity; na api, or even; 
acarah, good conduct; or satyam, truthfulness; 
vidyate, exist; tesu, in them. The demons are verily 
bereft of purity and good conduct; they are 
deceitful and given to speaking lies. Further, 
16.8 They say that the world is unreal, it has no 
basis, it is without a God. It is born of mutual 
union brought about by passion! What other (cause 
can there be)? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.8 Te, they, the domoniacal persons; ahuh, say; 
that the jagat, world; is asatyam, unreal-as we 
ourselves are prone to falsehood, so is this whole 
world unreal; apratistham, it has no basis, it does 
not have righteousness and unrighteousness as its 
basis; it is anisvaram, without a God-nor is there a 
God who rules this (world) according to 
rigtheousness and unrighteousness (of beings). 
Hence they say that the world is godless. 
Moreover, it is aparaspara-sambhutam, born of 
mutual union. The whole world is born of the 
union of the male and female impelled by passion. 
(That union is) kama-haitukam, brought about by 
passion. Kama-haitukam and kama-hetukam are 
the same. Kim anyat, what other (cause can there 
be)? There exists to other unseen cause such as 
righteousness, unrigtheousness, etc. Certainly, the 
passion of living beings is the cause of the world. 
This is the view of the materialists. 
16.9 Holding on to this view, (these people) who 
are of depraved character, of poor intellect, given 
to fearful actions and harmful, wax strong for the 
ruin of the world. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.9 Avastabhya, holding on to; etam, this; drstim, 
view; (these people) who are nasta-atmanah, of 
depraved character, who have deviated from the 
disciplines leading to the other world; alpa budhayah, of poor intellect, whose intellect is 
indeed limited, engrossed with material things; 
ugra-kamanah, given to fearful actions-who are 
cruel by nature; and ahitah, harmful; i.e. inimical to 
the world; prabhavanti, wax strong; ksayaya, for 
the ruin; jagatah, of the world. This is the 
construction. 
16.10 Giving themselves up to insatiable passion, 
filled with vanity, pride and arrogance, adopting 
bad abjectives due to delusion, and having impure 
resolves, they engage in actions. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.10 And asirtya, giving themselves upto; 
duspuram, insatiable; kamam, passion-a kind of 
desire; dambha-mana-mada-anvitah, filled with 
vanity, pride and arrogance; grhitva, adopting; 
asad-grahan, bad objectives, evil intentions; mohat, 
due to delusion, owing to non-discrimination; and 
asuci-vratah, having impure resolves; they 
pravartante, engage in actions in the world. 
Further, 
16.11 Beset with innumerable cares which end 
(only) with death, holding that the enjoyment of 
desirable objects is the highest goal, feeling sure 
that this is all. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.11 Upasritah, beset with; aparimeyam, 
innumerable; cintam, cares-worries that defy 
estimation of their limits!, i.e., constantly burdened 
with cares; pralayantam, which end (only) with 
death; kama-upabhoga-paramah, holding that the 
enjoyment of desirable objects is the highest goal kama is derived in the sense of 'that which is 
desired for', viz sound etc.; considered their
enjoyment to be the highest; having their minds 
convinced thus that this alone, viz the enjoyment of 
desirable objects, is the highest human goal; 
niscitah, feeling sure; iti, that; etavat, this is all 
16.12 Bound by hundreds of shackles in the form of 
hope, giving themselves wholly to passion and 
anger, they endeavour to amass wealth through 
foul means for the enjoyment of desirable objects. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.12 Baddhah, bound, being impelled, being lured 
from all sides; asa-pasa-sataih, by hundreds of 
shackles in the from of hope-the hopes themselves 
are the shackles; by hundreds of these; kama krodha-parayanah, giving themselves wholly to 
passion and anger, having passion and anger as 
their highest resort; ihante, they endeavour; artha sancayan, to amass wealth; anyayena, through foul 
means, i.e. by stealing others' wealth, etc.; kama-
bhoga-artham, for the enjoyment of desirable 
objects-in order to enjoy desirable objects, not for 
righteous acts. Their intentions, too, are of this 
kind: 
16.13 'This has been gained by me today; I shall 
acquire this desired object. This is in hand; again, 
this wealth also will come to me.' 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.13 Idam, this thing; labham, has been gained; 
maya, by me; adya, today; prapsye, I shall acquire; 
idam, this other; manoratham, desired object 
which is delectable to the mind. And idam, this; 
asti, is in hand; punah, again; idam, this; dhanam, 
wealth; api, also; bhavisyati, will come; me, to me, 
in the next year. Thereby I shall become rich and 
famous. 
16.14 'That enemy has been killed by me, and I 
shall kill others as well. I am the lord, I am the 
enjoyer, I am well-established, mighty and happy.' 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.14 Asau, that; unconquerable satruh, enemy, 
named Devadatta; hatah, has been killed; naya, by 
me; and hanisye, I shall kill; aparan, the other 
wretched ones. What will these pitiable persons 
do? There is none equal to me at all. Aham, I; am 
the isvarah, lord; I am the bhogi, enjoyer; and I am 
siddhah, well-established in every respect-I am 
blessed with sons, and grandsons born of sons and 
daughters. Not only am I a man, but I am also 
balavan, mighty; and I myself am sukhi, happpy; 
others are born to be but a burden to the earth! 
16.15 'I am rich and high-born; who else is there 
similar to me? I shall perform sacrifices; I shall 
give, I shall rejoice,'-thus they are diversely 
deluded by non-discrimination. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.15 Adhyah, I am rich in wealth; abhi-janavan, 
high-born in respect of my lineage; my seven 
generations are endowed with Vedic learnig etc. 
From that point of view also there is none equal to 
me. Kah anyah, who else; asti, is there; sadrsah, 
similar; maya, to me? Besides, yaksye, I shall 
perform sacrifices; in respect of sacrifices also I 
shall defeat others. Dasyami, I shall give-to actors 
and others; modisye, I shall rejoice, and I shall 
derive intense joy. Iti, thus; are they ajnana vimohitah, diversely deluded by non discrimination, subject to various indiscrimination. 
16.16 Bewildered by numerous thoughts, caught in 
the net of delusion, (and) engrossed in the 
enjoyment of desirable objects, they fall into a foul 
hell. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.16 Aneka-citta-vibhrantah, bewildered by 
numerous thoughts, confounded variously by 
thoughts of the kind stated above; moha-jala samavrtah, caught in the net of delusion-moha is 
non-discrimination, lack of understanding; that 
itself is like a net because of its nature of covering; 
enshrouded by that; prasaktah, engrossed; kama bhogesu, in the enjoyment of desirable objects, 
being immersed in that itself; they patanti, fall, 
owing to the sins accumulated thereby; asucau, 
into a foul; narake, hell, such as Vaitarani. 
[Vaitarani: It is the most terrible place of 
punishment; a river filled with all kinds of filth-
blood, hair, bones etc., and running with great 
impetuosity, hot and fetid. The other hells are 
Tamisra, Andhatamisra, Raurava, Kumbhipaka, 
and so on.] 
16.17 Self-conceited, haughty, filled with pride and 
intoxication of wealth, they perform sacrifices 
which are so in name only, with ostentation and 
regardless of the injunctions. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.17 Atma-sambhavitah, self-conceited, 
considering themselves by themselves to be 
possessed of good qualities-not considered to be so 
by holy men; stabdhah, haughty, having minds 
that are not humble; dhana-mana-mada-anvitah, 
filled with (anvita) the pride (mana) and 
intoxication (mada) of wealth (dhana); te, they; 
yajnate, perform sacrifices; namayajnaih, which are 
so in name only; dambhena, with ostentation, with 
religious hypocricy; avidhi-purvakam, regardless 
of the injunctions-without subsidiary rites and 
proper methods of performance as enjoined. 
16.18 Resorting to egotism, power, arrogance, 
passion and anger, hating Me in their own and 
others' bodies, (they become) [As the finite verb is 
missing in the verse, we have supplied 'they 
become'. S. adds the verb prabhavanti, wax strong, 
from verse 9, and constructs the last portion thus: 
'...the envious ones wax strond.' Following S. S., 
however, one may combine this verse with the 
preceding verse by taking 'perform sacrifices' as 
the finite verb.-Tr.'] envious by nature. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.18 Ahankaram, egotism-that which considers 
the Self to which have been imputed actual and 
imaginary qualities as 'I am this', which is called 
ignorance and is most painful, and is the source of 
all ills as also of all evil deeds; so also balam, 
power, which seeds to defear others and is 
associated with passion and desire; darpam, 
arrogance, a particular defect abiding in the mind, 
on the upsurge of which one transgresses 
righteousness; kamam, passion with regard to 
women and others; krodham, anger at things tha 
are undesirable;-samsritah, resorting to these and 
other great evils; and further, pradvisantah, hating; 
mam, Me, God-transgression of My commands is 
hatred (towards Me); indulging in that, atma-para dehesu, in their own and others' bodies as the 
witness of their intellects and actions; (they 
become) abhyasuyakah, envious by nature, 
intolerant of the qualities of those who tread the 
right path. 
16.19 I cast for ever those hateful, cruel, evil-doers 
in the worlds, the vilest of human beings, verily 
into the demoniacla classes. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.19 Because of their defect of unrighteousness, 
aham, I; ksipami, cast, hurl; ajasram, for ever; all 
tan, those; who are dvisatah, hateful of Me; kruran, 
cruel; and asubhan, who are evil doers; samsaresu, 
in the worlds-who are on the paths leading to hell; 
who are the nara-adhaman, vilest of human beings, 
who are opposed to the right path, who are hostile 
to the pious people; eva, verily; asurisu, into the 
demoniacal; yonisu, classes-tigers, loins, etc., 
which are full of evil deeds. The verb cast is to be 
connected with 'into the classes'. 
16.20 Being born among the demoniacal species in 
births after births, the foods, without ever reaching 
Me, O son of Kunti, attain conditions lower than 
that. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.20 Apannah, being born, having acquired; 
(births) asurim, among the demoniacal; yonim, 
species; janmani janmani, in births after births; the 
mudhah, fools, non-discriminating ones; being 
born in every birth into species in which tamas 
prevails, and going downwards, aprapya eva, 
without ever reaching, approaching; mam, Me, 
who am God; O son of Kunti, yanti, they attain; 
gatim, conditions; tatah adhamam, lower even than 
that. Since there is not the least possibility of 
attaining Me, what is implied by saying, 'without 
ever reachin Me', is, 'by not attaining the virtuous 
path enjoined by Me.' This is being stated as a 
summary of all the demoniacal qualities. The 
triplet-under which are comprehended all the 
different demoniacal qualities though they are 
infinite in number, (and) by the avoidance of which 
(three) they (all the demaniacal qualities) become 
rejected, and which is the root of all evils- is being 
stated: 
16.21 This door of hell, which is the destroyer of 
the soul, is of three kinds-passion, anger and also 
greed. Therefore one should forsake these three. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.21 Idam, this; dvaram, door; narakasya, of hell for entering it; which is the nasanam, destroyer; 
atmanah, of the soul; is trividham of three kinds. It 
is that by the mere entry into which the soul 
perishes, i.e., it ceases to be fit for attaining any 
human goal. hence it is said that it is the door 
which is the destroyer of the soul. Which is that? 
Kamah, passion; krodhah, anger; and also lobhah, 
greed. Tasmat, therefore; tyajet, one shoud forsake; 
etat trayam, these three. Since this door is the 
destroyer of the soul, therefore one should 
renounce this group of three-passion etc. This is a 
eulogy of renunciation. 
16.22 O son of Kunti, a person who is free from 
these three doors to darkness strives for the good 
of the soul. Thereby he attains the highest Goal. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.22 O son of Kunti, narah, a person; who is 
vimuktah, free; etaih, from these; tribhih, three; 
tamo-dvaraih, doors to darkness, i.e., passion etc. 
which are doors to the darkness of hell consisting 
of sorrow and delusion; freed from three three 
which are such, acarati, strives for;-for what?-
sreyah, the good; atmanah, of the soul: debarred by 
which (doors) he could not strive earlier, and on 
the dispelling of which he strives. Tatah, thereby, 
as a result of that striving; yati, he attains; the 
param, suprme; gatim, Goal, i.e. Liberation, as 
well. [Not only does he attain Liberation by 
renouncing the demoniacal qualities, but he also 
secures happiness in this world.] The scripture is 
instrumental in this complete renunciation of the 
demoniacal qualities and striving for what is good. 
Both can be undertaken on the authority of the 
scriptures, not otherwise. Hence, 
16.23 Ignoring the precept of the scriptures, he who 
acts under the impulsion of passion,-he does not 
attain perfection, nor happiness, nor the supreme 
Goal. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.23 Utsrjiya, ignoring, setting aside; sastra vidhim, the precept of the scriptures, which is th 
source of the knoweldge of what is duty and what 
is not-called injunction and prohibition; yah, he 
who; vartate, acts; kama-karatah, under the 
impulsion of passion; sah, he; na, does not; 
avapnoti, attain; siddhim, perfection, fitness for 
Liberation; nor even sukham, happiness in this 
world; nor even the param, supreme best; gatim, 
Goal-heaven or Liberation. 
16.24 Therefore, the scripture is your authority as 
regards the determination of what is to be done 
and what is not to be done. After understanding 
(your) duty as presented by scriptural injunction, 
you ought to perform (your duty) here. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
16.24 Tasmat, therefore; sastram, the scripure; is te, 
your; pramanam, authority, the means of 
knowledge; karya-akarya-vyavasthitau, as regards 
the determination of what is to be done and what 
is not to be done. Therefore, jnatva, after 
understanding; that which is your own karma, 
duty; sastra-vidhana-uktam, as presented by 
scriptural injunction-vidhana is the same as vidhi, 
precept, in the form, 'you should do', 'you should 
not do'; as presented by that; arhasi, you ought; 
kartum, to perform; it iha, here. 'Here' is used for 
pointing out the sphere in which one is intitled to 
perform his duties. 
17.1 Arjuna said -- But, ['But' is used to present a 
standpoint distinct from the earlier ones 
understand from 16.23-4.-S.] O Krsna, what is the 
state [i.e., where do the rites undertaken by them 
end?] of those who, endued with faith, adore 
[Adore-perform sacrifices, distribute wealth etc. in 
honour of gods and others.] by ignoring the 
injunctions of the scriptures? Is it sattva, rajas or 
tamas? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.1 Tu, but; of Krsna, ka, what; is the nistha, state; 
tesam, of those-whosoever they may be; ye, who; 
being anvitah, endued; sraddhaya, with faith, with 
the idea that there is something hereafter; yajante, 
adore gods and others; utsriya, by ignoring, setting 
aside; sastra-vidhim, the unjunctions of the 
scriptures, the injunctions of the Vedas and the 
Smrtis? Is the state of those who are such sattvam, 
sattva; aho, or; rajah, rajas; or tamah, tamas? This is 
what is meant: Does the adoration of gods and 
others that they undertake come under the 
category of sattva or rajas or tamas? By 'those who, 
endued with faith, adore by ignoring the 
injunctions of the scriptures' are here meant those 
who, not finding any injunction which can be 
characterized as 'enjoined by the Vedas' 'or 
enjoined by the Smrtis', worship gods and others 
by merely observing the conduct of their elders. 
But, on the other hand, those who, though aware of 
some scriptural injunction, discard them and 
worship the gods and others in ways contrary to 
the injunctions, are not meant here by 'those who, 
ignoring scriptural injunctions, adore...' Why? 
Because of the qualifying phrase, 'being endued 
with faith'. For, it cannot be imagined that even 
when they are aware of some scriptural injunction 
about worship of gods and others, they discard this 
out of their faithlessness, and yet they engage in 
the worship of gods and others enjoined by those 
scriptures by becoming imbued with faith! 
Therefore, by 'those who, endued with faith, adore 
by ignoring the injunctions of the scriptures' are 
here meant those very ones mentioned earlier. An 
answer to this question relating to a general topic 
cannot be given without splitting it up. Hence,- 
17.2 The Blessed Lord said -- That faith of the 
embodied beings, born of their own nature, is 
threefold-born of sattva, rajas and tamas. Hear 
about it. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.2 Sa, that; sraddha, faith, the state about which 
you ask; dehinam, of the embodied beings; 
svabhavaja, born of their own nature-by svabhava 
(nature) is meant that latent impression of virtuous 
acts etc. acquired in the past lives, which becomes 
manifest at the time of death; what arises out of 
that is svabhavaja-; is trividha, threefold, of three 
kinds; sattviki, born of sattva, and related to 
worship of gods, etc.; rajasi, born of rajas, 
concerning worship of Yaksas (a class of demi gods, Kubera and others), Raksas (ogres, Nairrti 
and others); and tamasi, born of tamas, concerning 
worship of ghosts, goblins and others. Thus it is of 
three kinds. Srnu, hear; tam, about it, that faith, as 
it is being stated. That (faith) is threefold as 
follows: 
17.3 O scion of the Bharata dynasty, the faith of all 
beings is in accordance with their minds. This 
person is made up of faith as the dominant factor. 
He is verily what his faith is. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.3 O scion of the Bharata dynasty, the sraddha, 
faith; sarvasya, of all beings; bhavati, is; sattva anurupa, in accordance with their minds, in 
accordance with the internal organ which is 
imbued with particular impression. If this is so, 
what follows? The answer is: Ayam, this; purusah, 
person, the transmigrating soul; is sraddhamayah, 
made up of faith as the dominating factor. How? 
Sah, he, the individual soul; is eva, verily; sah, that; 
yah yat-sraddhah,which is the faith of that 
individual-he surely conforms to his faith. And, as 
a consequence, a person's steadfastness in sattva 
etc. is to be inferred from the grounds of his actions 
such as worship of gods etc. Hence the Lord says: 
17.4 Those having the sattva quality worship the 
gods; those having rajas, the demi-gods and ogres; 
and other people possessed of tamas worship 
ghosts and the hosts of spirits. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.4 Sattvikah, those having the sattva quality, 
those steadfast in sattva; yajante, worship; devan, 
the gods; rajasah, those having rajas; (worship) 
yaksa-raksamsi, the demi-gods and ogres; and 
anye, other; janah, people; tamasah, possessed of 
tamas; yajante, worship; pretan, ghosts; and bhuta ganan, the hosts of spirits-Sapta-matrkas (the 
Seven Mothers) and others. Thus, in the context of 
abandonment of scriptural injunctions, the states of 
sattva etc. have been determined through their 
effects. As regards that, it is only one in thousands 
who, being established in sattva, becomes devoted 
to the adoration of gods. But, to be sure, creatures 
are mostly rooted deeply in rajas or tamas. How? 
17.5 Those persons who, given to ostentation and 
pride, and possessed of passion, attachment and 
strength, undertake severe austerities not 
sanctioned in the scriptures; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.5 Ye, those; janah, persons; who tapyante, 
undertake, perform; ghoram, severe; tapah, 
austerity, productive of pain to oneself as also to 
creatures; asastra-vihitam, not sanctioned by the 
scriptures; they, being dambh-ahankara-
samyuktah, given to ostentation and pride; and 
kama-raga-bala-anvitah, impelled by the strength 
of passion and attachment, or possessed of passion, 
attachment and strength [Kama-raga can also mean 
desirable objects and the desire to enjoy them.]-. 
17.6 (And who,) being non-discriminating, torture, 
all the organs in the body as also even Me who 
reside in the body,-know them as possessed of 
demoniacal conviction. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.6 (And who,) acetasah, being non discriminating; karsayantah, torture; bhuta gramam, all the organs; sarirastham, in the body, 
ca, as also; torture eva, even; mam, Me; antah sarira-stham, who reside in the body as the witness 
of its actions and intellect-non-adherence to My 
injunctions itself is 'torturing Me'; viddhi, know; 
tan, them; asura-niscayan, as possessed of 
demoniacal convictions. Know them so that they 
may be avoided. This is an instruction. The liking 
of persons possessing the qualities of sattva, rajas 
and tamas for foods that are divided into three 
groups, viz succulent, oleaginous, etc., is 
respectively being shown here so that, by knowing 
the presence of the qualities of sattva, rajas and 
tamas (in oneself) from the indications of the 
degree of one's preference for particular foods as 
are succulent, oleaginous, etc., one may avoid 
foods having the characteristics of rajas and tamas, 
and accept food with the characteristics of sattva. 
Similarly, sacrifices etc. also are being explained 
here under three categories according to the 
distinguishing quality of sattva etc. So that one 
may reject those known to be born of rajas and 
tamas, and undertake only those born of sattva. 
17.7 Food also, which is dear to all, is of three 
kinds; and so also are sacrifices, austerity and 
charity. Listen to this classification of them. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.7 Aharah, food; api tu, also; which is priyah, 
dear; sarvasya, to all [Here Ast. adds praninah 
(creatures).-Tr.] who eat it; bhavati, is; trividhah, of 
three kinds; so also yajnah, sacrifices; similarly, 
tapah, austerity; tatha, so also; danam, charity. 
Srnu, listen; to imam, this; bhedam, classification; 
tesam, of them, of food etc., which is going to be 
stated. 
17.8 Foods that augment life, firmless of mind, 
strength, health, happiness and delight, and which 
are succulent, oleaginous, substantial and 
agreeable, are dear to one endowed with sattva. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.8 Aharah, foods; ayuh-sattva-bala-arogya sukha-priti-vivardhanah, that augment life, 
firmneess of mind, strength, health delight; [Life-a 
brilliant life; firmness of mind or vigour; strength ability of body and organs; happiness-pleasure of 
mind; delight-great joy even at seeing other 
persons prosperous.] and which are rasyah, 
succulent; snigdhah, oleaginous; sthirah, 
substantial, lasing in the body for long; [Beneficial 
to the body for long.] and hrdyah, agreeable, to 
one's liking; are sattvika-priyah, dear to one 
endowed with sattva. 
17.9 Foods that are bitter, sour, salty, very hot, 
pungent, dry and burning, and which production 
pain, sorrow and disease, are dear to one having 
rajas. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.9 Foods that are katu-amla-lavana-atyusna tiksna-ruksa-vidahinah, bitter, sour, salty, very hot 
(-'very' is to be connected with all, viz bitter etc.; 
that is very bitter, very sour, and so on-), pungent, 
dry [Without fat.] and burning; and duhkha-soka amaya-pradah, which produce pain, sorrow and 
disease; [Pain, immediate suffering; sorrow, grief
arising from not having that desired food.] are 
rajasasyaistah, dear to one having rajas. 
17.10 Food which is not properly cooked, lacking 
in essence, putrid and stale, and even ort and that 
which is unfit for sacrifice, is dear to one possessed 
of tamas. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.10 Bhojanam, food; which is yata-yamam, not 
properly cooked [Yata-yamam lit. means 'crooked 
three hours ago', that which has lost its essence; but 
here it is translated as 'not properly cooked to 
avoid tautology, for the next word gata-rasam, too, 
means lacking in essence.-Tr.] (-because food that 
has lost its essence is referred to by the word 
gatarasam-); gata-rasam, lacking in essence; puti, 
putrid; and paryusitam, stale, cooked on the 
previous day and kept over-night; and even 
ucchistam, ort, remnants of a meal; and 
amedhyam, that which is unfit for sacrifice;- this 
kind of food is tamasa-priyam, dear to one 
possessed of tamas. Now then, sacrifices of three 
kinds are being stated: 
17.11 That sacrifice which is in accordance with the 
injunctions, (and is) performed by persons who do 
not hanker after results, and with the mental 
conviction that it is surely obligatory, is done 
through sattva. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.11 Sah, that; yajnah, sacrifice; vidhi-drstah, 
which is in accordance with the injunctions, which 
is known through scriptural unjunctions; (and) 
yah, which; is ijyate, performed; a-phala akanksibhih, by persons who do not hanker after 
results; manah samadhaya, with the mental 
conviction; iti, that; yastavyam, eva, it is surely 
obligatory, their duty is to accomplish the sacrifice 
just as it should be-with the firm idea, 'I have no 
human goal to achieve through this'-; is said to be a 
sacrifice which is sattvikah, done through sattva. 
17.12 But that sacrifice which is performed having 
in veiw a result, as also for ostentation,-know that 
sacrifice to be done through rajas, O greatest 
among the descendants of Bharata. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.12 Tu, but; yat, that which; is ijyate, performed; 
abhisandhaya, having in view; a phalam, result; 
api ca, as also; dambhartham, for ostentation; 
viddhi, know; tam, that; yajnam, sacrifice; to be 
rajasam, done through rajas; bharatasrestha, O 
greatest among the descendants of Bharata. 
17.13 They declare that sacrifice as 'done through 
tamas' which is contrary to injunction, in which 
food is not distributed, in which mantras are not 
used, in which offerings are not made to priests, 
and which is devoid of faith. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.13 Paricaksate, they delclare; that yajnam, 
sacrifice; as tamasam, done through tamas; which 
is vidhi-hinam, contrary to injunction, opposed to 
what is enjoined; asrstannam, in which food is not 
distributed-a sacrifice in which food (annam) is not 
distributed (asrstam) to Brahmanas; mantra-hinam, 
in which mantras are not used, which is bereft of 
mantras, intonation and distinct pronunciation; 
adaksinam, in which offerings are not made to 
priests as prescribed; and which is sraddha virahitam, devoid of faith. After that, now is being 
stated the three kinds of austerity: 
17.14 The worship of gods, twice-borns, venerable 
persons and the wise; purity, straightforwardness, 
celibacy and non-injury,-are said to be bodily 
austerity. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.14 Deva-dvija-guru-pujanam, the worship of 
gods, twice-borns, venerable persons and the wise; 
saucam, purity; arjavam, straightforwardness; 
brahmacarayam, celibacy; and ahimsa, non-injury; 
ucyate, are said to be; sariram, bodily; tapah, 
austerity, austerity accomplished through the 
body: that which can be performed by the agent, 
etc. [See 18. 13-15.-Tr.], (i.e.) with the whole group 
of body and organs, in which the body 
predominates; for the Lord will say, 'these five are 
its causes' (18.15). 
17.15 That speech which causes no pain, which is 
true, agreeable and beneficial; as well as the 
practice of study of the scriptures,-is said to be 
austerity of speech. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.15 Yat, that; vakyam, speech; anudvegakaram, 
which causes no pain, which is not hurtful to 
creatures which is satyam, true; priya-hitam, 
agreeable and beneficial with regard to facts seen 
or unseen-. 'Speech' is qualified by characteristics 
such as being not hurtful, etc. The ca (and) is used 
for grouping together the qualifying 
characteristics. When a sentence is used in order to 
make another understand, if it happens to be avoid 
of one or two or three among the qualities truthfulness, agreeability, beneficialness, and non hurtfulness-, then it is not austerity of speech. As in 
the case of a truthful utterance there would occur a 
want of austerity of speech if it be lacking in one or 
two or three of the others, so also in the case of an 
agreeable utterance there would be no austerity of 
speech were it ot be without one or two or three of 
the others; and similarly, there would be no 
austerity of speech even in a beneficial utterance 
which is without one or two or three of the others. 
What, again, is that austerity (of speech)? That 
utterance which is true as also not hurtful, and is 
agreeable and beneficial, is the highest austerity of 
speech: As for example, the utterance, 'Be calm, my 
boy. Practise study and yoga. Thereby you will 
gain the highest.' Svadhyaya-abhyasanam, the 
practice of the study of scriptures, as is enjoined; ca 
eva, as well; ucyate, in said to be; tapah, austerity; 
vanmayam, of speech. 
17.16 Tranquillity of mind, gentleness, reticence, 
withdrawal of the mind, purity of heart,-these are 
what is called mental austerity. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.16 Manah-prasadah, tranquillity of mind, 
making the mind free from anxiety; saumyatvam, 
gentleness-that which is called kindliness of spirit, 
[Kindliness towards all, and also not entertaining 
any evil thought towards anybody.] a certain 
condition of the mind resulting in calmness of the 
face, etc.; maunam, reticence-since even the control 
of speech follows from the control of mind, 
therefore the cause is implied by the effect; so 
maunam means control of the mind; [Or, maunam 
may mean thinking of the Self, the attitude of a 
meditator. The context being of 'mental austerity', 
reticence is explained as control of the mind with 
regard to speech.] atma-vinigrahah, withdrawal of 
the mind-withdrawal of the mind in a general way, 
from everything; maunam (control of the mind) is 
the mind's withdrawal with regard to speech 
alone; this is the distinction-; bhava-samsuddhih, 
purity of heart, absence of trickery while dealing 
with others; iti etat, these are; what is ucyate, 
called; manasam, mental; tapah, austerity. How the 
above-described bodily, verbal and mental 
austerities undertaken by poeple are divided into 
three classes-of sattva etc.-is being stated: 
17.17 When that threefold austerity is undertaken 
with supreme faith by people who do not hanker 
after results and are self-controlled, they speak of it 
as born of sattva. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.17 When tat, that; trividham, threefold-based on 
three factors; tapah, austerity, which is being 
discussed; is taptam, undertaken, practised; 
paraya, with supreme, with the highest; 
sraddhaya, faith, belief in God and the other world; 
naraih, by people, by its performers; aphala akanksibhih, who do not hanker after results,who 
are devoid of desire for results; and yuktaih, who 
are self-controlled;-that austerity which is of this 
kind, the noble people paricaksate, speak of it; as 
sattvikam, born of sattva. 
17.18 That austerity which is undertaken for 
earning a name, being honoured and worshipped, 
and also ostentatiously,-that is spoken of as born of 
rajas, belonging to this world, uncertain and 
transitory. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.18 Yat, that; tapah, austerity; which is kriyate, 
undertaken; satkara-mana-pujartham, for earning a 
name, being honoured and worshipped-for 
earning a name, (i.e.) for being spoken of thus: 
'This Brahmana, who is given to austerity, is pious'; 
for being honoured by (others') standing up 
respectfully, salutation, etc.; for being worshipped 
with washing of feet, adoration, feeding, etc.; for 
these-; ca eva, and also, (that) austerity which is
performed dambhena, ostentatiously; tat, that; 
proktam, is spoken of; as rajasam, born of rajas; 
iha, belonging to this world; [i.e. yielding fruits 
only in this world.] calam, uncertain-its result 
being unpredictable; and adhruvam, transitory. 
17.19 That austerity which is undertaken with a 
foolish intent, by causing pain to oneself, or for the 
destruction of others-that is said to be born of 
tamas. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.19 Yat, that; tapah, austerity; which is kriyate, 
under-taken; mudha-grahena, with a foolish intent, 
with a conviction arising out of non discriminating; pidaya, causing pain; atmanah, to 
oneself (to one's body etc.); va, or; utsadanartham, 
for the destruction; parasya, of another; tat, that; is 
udahrtam, said to be; an austerity tamasam, born 
of tamas. Now the classification of charity is being 
spoken of: 
17.21 But the gift which is given expecting 
reciprocation, or again, with a desire for its result, 
and which is given grudgingly,- that is considered 
to be born of rajas. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.21 Tu, but; the danam, gift; yat, which; diyate, is 
made; prati-upakara-artham, expecting 
reciprocation-with this purpose in view: 'In time, 
he will render service in return'-; va punah, or 
again; uddisya, with a desire for; its phalam, result that, 'To me will accrue some unseen reward of this 
gift'-; and which is diyate, given; pariklistam, 
grudgingly, with reluctance; tat, that; is smrtam, 
considered to be; rajasam, born of rajas. 
17.22 The gift which is made at an improper place 
and time, and to undeserving persons, without 
proper treatment and with disdain, is declared to 
be born of tamas. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.22 Tat, that; danam, gift; yat, which; diyate, is 
given; adesakale, at an improper place and time-in 
an unholy place full of barbarians and impure 
things, etc.; at an improper time: which is not well 
known as productive of merit; without such 
specially as Sankranti etc.-; and apatrebhyah, to 
undeserving persons, to fools, thieves and others;-
and even when the place etc. are proper-asatkrtam, 
without proper treatment, without sweet words, 
washing of feet, worship, etc.; and avajnatam, with 
disdain, with insults to the recipient; is udahrtam, 
declared to be; tamasam, born of tamas. This 
advice is being imparted for making sacrifices, 
gifts, austerities, etc. perfect: 
17.23 'Om-tat-sat' ['Om, That, Existence': 'Om iti 
brahma, Om is Brahman' (Tai. 1.8.1); 'Tattvamasi, 
Thou art That' (Ch. 6.8.7); and 'Sadeva somya 
idamagra asit, This was Existence alone in the 
beginning, O amiable one' (Ch. 6.2.1)-in these texts 
Brahman is indicated by the words Om, tat, sat.]-
this is considered to be the threefold designation of 
Brahman. The Brahmanas and Vedas and the 
sacrifices were ordanined by that in the days of 
yore. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.23 Om, tat, sat-iti, this; is smrtah, considered, 
regarded, in the Vedanta, by the knowers of 
Brahman; to be the trividhah, threefold; nirdesah, 
designation, mention by name-nirdesa is that by 
which a thing is specified; brahmanah, of Brahman. 
The Brahmanas and the Vedas and the sacrifices 
were vihitah, ordainded, [When some defect arises 
in sacrifice etc., then this is corrected by uttering 
one of these words-Om, tat, sat.] created; tena, by 
that threefold designation; pura, in the days of yore 
[In the beginning of creation by Prajapati.]-this is 
said by way of eulogizing the designation. 
17.24 Therefore, acts of sacrifice, charity and 
austerity as prescribed through injunctions, of 
those who study and expound the Vedas, always 
commence after uttering the syllable Om. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.24 Tasmat, therefore; yajna-dana-tapah, kriyah, 
acts of sacrifice, charity and austerity-acts in the 
form of sacrifice etc.; vidhana-uktah, as prescribed 
through injunctions, as ordained by the scriptures; 
brahma-vadinam, of those who study and expound 
the Vedas; satatam, always; pravartante, 
commence; udahrtya, after uttering; om iti, the 
syllable Om. 
17.25 After (uttering) the word tat, acts of sacrifice 
and austerity as also the various acts of charity are 
performed without regard for results by persons 
aspiring for Liberation. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.25 After uttering the word tat, which is a name 
of Brahman, yajna-tapah-kriyah, acts of sacrifice 
and austerity; ca, as also; vividhah, the various; 
dana-kriyah, acts of charity, such as gift of land, 
gold, etc.; kriyante, are performed; 
anabhisandhaya, without regard for; phalam, 
results of actions; moksa-kanksibhih, by persons 
aspiring for Liberation. The use of the words Om 
and tat has been stated. Thereafter, the use of the 
word sat is bieng presently stated: 
17.26 This word sat is used with regard to 
(something) coming into being and with regard to 
(someone) becoming good. So also, O son of Prtha, 
the word sat is used with regard to an auspicious 
rite. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.26 Etat, this; sat iti, word sat, a name of 
Brahman; prayujyate, is used, is uttered; sad bhave, with regard to (something) coming into 
being-with regard to coming into existence of 
something that was not there, as for instance the 
birth of a son who was not there before; so also 
sadhu-bhave, with regard to (someone) becoming 
good-sadhu-bhava means coming to possess good 
conduct by an evil person who had bad behaviour; 
with regard to that. Tatha, so also, O Son of Prtha; 
the sat-sabdah, word sat; yujyate (-which is the 
same as prayujyate-), is used; prasaste karmani, 
with regard to an auspicious rite, such as mirage 
etc. 
17.27 And the steadfastness in sacrifice, austerity 
and charity is spoken of as sat. And even the action 
meant for these is, verily, called as sat (good). 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.27 And sthitih, steadfastness; that is yajne, in 
sacrifice, in the act of sacrifice; the steadfastness 
that is tapasi, in austerity; and the steadfastness 
that is dane, in charity; that ucyate, is spoken of; sat 
iti, as sat, by learned persons. And eva, even; the 
karma, action; tad-arthiyam, meant for these-for 
sacrifice, charity and austerity, or for Him whose 
names are under discussion, i.e. for God; is eva, 
verily; abhidhiyate, called; sat iti, as sat (good). 
Thus, in this way, the acts of sacrifice, austerity, 
etc., even when they are devoid of sattva and 
goodness, become good and endued with sattva by 
he use of the three names of Brahman with faith. 
And as regards those (sacrifice etc.), since in all 
cases everything is performed with a 
predominance of faith, therefore 
17.28 O son of Prtha, whatever is offered in 
sacrifice and given in charity, as also whatever 
austerity is undertakne or whatever is done 
without, faith, is said to be of on avail. And it is of 
no consequence after death, nor here. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
17.28 O son of Prtha, whatever is hutam, offered in 
sacrifice, poured as oblation; and dattam, given in 
charity to Brahmanas,without faith; whatever 
tapah, austerity; is taptam, performed without 
faith; so also, whatever is krtam, done without 
faith, e.g. praise, salutation, etc.; all that ucyate, is 
said to be; asat iti, of no avail, since it is outside th 
course of discipline leading to Me. Ca, and, 
although involving great effort; na ca tat, it is of no 
consequence; pretya, after death, for producing 
(some) result; na, nor even for any result; iha, 
because it is condemned by the wise. [Thus it is 
established in this chapter that, among persons 
who are not at all versed in the scriptures, but are 
possessed of (either of the) three characterisitcs of 
sattva, (rajas) etc., only those shall attain to 
Liberation who steadfastly resort to sattva alone by 
partaking of sattvika food, (performing sattvika) 
sacrifices) etc. to te exclusion of rajasika and 
tamasika food etc., who destroy any defect that 
might arise in sacrifice etc. by uttering the names of 
Brahman, who have fully purified their intellect, 
and who have attained to the realization of Truth 
arising from one's being endowed with such 
disciplines as hearing and and thinking (sravana, 
manana) of, and meditation (nididhyasana) on 
Brahman.] 
18.1 Arjuna said -- O mighty-armed Hrsikesa, O 
slayer of (the demon) Kesi, I want to know 
serverally the truth about sannyasa as also about 
tyaga. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.1 O mighty-armed Hrsikesa, kesi-nisudana, O 
slayer of (the demon) Kesi; icchami, I want; 
veditum, to know; prthak, severally, through their 
mutual distinctions; tattvam, the truth, the intrinsic 
nature, i.e. the real meaning; sannyasasya, of 
sannyasa, i.e. the meaning of the word sannyasa, 
ca, as also; tyagasya, of tyaga, i.e. the meaning of 
the word tyaga. Kesi was a demon who had 
assumed the form of a horse, and Lord Vasudeva 
had killed him. Hence He is addressed by that 
name (Kesi-nisudana) by Arjuna. The word 
sannyasa and tyaga, used in various places in the 
preceding chapters, are not explicit in their 
implications. Therefore, in order to determine them 
for Arjuna who had put the question,- 
18.2 The Blessed Lord said -- The learned ones 
know sannyasa to be the giving up of actions done 
with a desire for reward. The adepts call the 
abandonment of the results of all works as tyaga. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.2 Some kavayah, learned ones; viduh, know; 
sannyasam, sannyasa, the meaning of the word 
sannyasa, the non-performance of what comes as a 
duty; to be the nyasam, giving up; karmanam, of 
actions; kamyanam, done with a desire for reward, 
e.g. Horse-sacrifice etc. Sarva-karma-phala-tyagah, 
abandonment of the results of all actions, means 
the giving up of the results accruing to oneself 
from all actions- the daily obligatory and the 
occasional (nitya and naimittika) that are 
performed. Vicaksanah, the adepts, the learned 
ones; prahuh, call, speak of that; as tyagam, tyaga, 
as the meaning of the word tyaga. Even if 'the 
giving up of actions for desired results' or 'the 
abandonment of results' be the intended meaning, 
in either case the one meaning of the words 
sannyasa and tyaga amounts only to tyaga (giving 
up); they do not imply distinct categories as do the 
words 'pot' and 'cloth'. Objection: Well, is it not 
that they say the daily obligatory (nitya) and the 
occasional (naimittika) rites and duties have no 
results at all? How is the giving up of their results 
spoken of-like the abandoning of a son of a barren 
woman?! Reply: This defect does not desire. It is 
the intention of the Lord that the nitya-karmas 
(daily obligatory duties) also have results; for the 
Lord will say, 'The threefold results of actions-the 
undesirable, the desirable and the mixed-accrue 
after death to those who do not resort to tyaga', 
and also, 'but never to those who resort to 
sannyasa (monks)' (12). Indeed, by showing that, it 
is only in the case of sannyasins (monks) alone that 
there is no connection with the results of actions, 
the Lord asserts in, '...accrue after death to those 
who do not resort to tyaga (renunciation)' (abid.), 
that the result of daily obligatory (nitya) duties 
accrue to those who are not sannyasins (monks). 
18.3 Some learned persons say that action, beset 
with evil (as it is), should be given up, and others 
(say) that the practice of sacrifice, charity and 
austertiy should not be given up. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.3 Eke, some; manisinah, learned ones, 
subscribing to the views of the Sankhyas and 
others; prahuh, say; that dosavat, beset with evil 
(as it is);-What is it?- karma, action, all actions, 
becuase they are the cause of bondage; tyajyam, 
should be given up even by those who are eligible 
for actions (rites and duties). Or, it (action) is to be 
given up dosavat, just as defects such as 
attachment etc. are renounced. Ca and, in that very 
context; apare, others; (say) that yajana-dana tapah-karma, the practice of sacrifice, charity and 
auterity; na tyajyam, should not be given up. These 
alternatives are with regard to only those who are 
qualified for action, but not with regard to the 
monks who are steadfast in Knowledge and have 
gone beyond the stages of life. This discussion is 
not concerned with those who are held to be 
outside the scope of eligibility for action in the 
assertion (by the Lord), 'The steadfastness in the 
Yoga of Knowledge by men of realization was 
spoken of by Me in the days of yore' (see 3.3). 
Objection: Well, just as those who are qualified for 
rites and duties and who have their distinct 
steadfastness are being considered here in the 
chapter summarizing the entire scripture, though 
they have been dealt with earlier in '...through the 
Yoga of Action for the yogis' (3.3), similarly, let 
even the men of realization who are steadfast in 
Knowledge be considered here. Reply: No, because 
it is not logical that their renunciation should result 
from delusion and sorrow (cf. 7 and 8). The men of 
realization do not perceive in the Self the sorrows 
arising from physical torment; for it has been 
shown that desire etc. are attributes only of the 
field (body) (see 13.6). Therefore, they do not 
renounce action but of fear for physical trouble and 
pain. Nor do they perceive actions in the Self, on 
account of which they should give up obligatory 
duties out of delusion. In fact, they renounce with 
the conviction that 'action belongs to the organs' 
(see 3.28); 'I certainly do not do anything' (see 5.8); 
for, the mode of renunciation of an enlightened 
person was shown in, '...having given up all actions 
mentally' (5.13). Therefore, those others who are 
qualified for rites and duties, who are unelightened 
about the Self, and for whom renunciation is 
possible out of delusion and from fear of physical 
trouble, are alone condemned as persons who, 
being possessed of tamas and rajas, resort to 
renunciation. And this is done with a veiw to
eulogizing the renunciation of the results of rites 
and duties by the unenlightened men of action. 
Besides, the men of renunciation in the real sense 
have been particularly pointed out in, 'who has 
renounced ever undertaking,' 'who is silent, 
content with anything, homeless, steadyminded' 
(12.16, 19), and also (while determining) the 
characteristics of one who has transcended the 
gunas (Chapter 14). The Lord will further say, 
'...which is the supreme consummation of 
Knowledge' (50). Therefore the monks steadfast in 
Knowledge are not intended to be spoken of here. 
It is only the abandoning of the results of action 
which, by virtue of its being imbued with the 
quality of sattva, is spoken of as sannyasa in 
contrast to the renunciation of actions which is 
possessed of tamas etc.; it is not sannyasa in the 
primary-sense-the renunciation of all actions. 
Objection: According to the reason shown in the 
text, 'Since it is not possible for one who holds on 
to a body to give up actions entirely' (11), may it 
not be argued that the actions entirely' (11), may it 
not be argued that the word sannyasa is certainly 
used in the primary sense because it is impossible 
to abandon all works? Reply: No, for the next 
adducing the reason is meant for eulogy. Just as, 
'From renunciation immediately (follows) Peace' 
(12.12), is a mere eulogy of renunciation of the 
fruits of action, it having been enjoined on Arjuna 
who was unenlightened and incapable of 
undertaking the various alternatives (paths) as 
stated earlier, so also is this sentence, 'Since it is not 
possible for one who holds on to a body to give up 
actions entirely' (11), meant for eulogizing the 
renunciation of the resorts of all actions. No one 
can point an exception to the proposition that 
'having given up all actions mentally, (the 
embodied man of self-control) continues 
happily...without doing or causing (others) to do 
anything at all' (see 5.13). Therefore these 
alternative veiws regarding sannyasa and tyaga are 
concerned only with those who are qualified for 
rites and duties. But the enlightened ones who 
have realized the supreme Truth are competent 
only for steadfastness in Knowledge, which is 
characterized by renunciation of all actions; not for 
anything else. Hence, they do not come within the 
purview of the alternative veiws. Thus has this 
been pointed out by us in connection with the text, 
'...he who knows this One as indestructible...' (2.21) 
as also in the beginning of the third chapter. 
18.4 O the most excellent among the descendants 
of Bharata, hear from Me the firm conclusion 
regarding that tyaga. For, O greatest among men, 
tyaga has been clearly declared to be of three 
kinds. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.4 Bharata-sattama, O the most excellent among 
the descendants of Bharata; srnu, hear, understand; 
me, from Me, from My statement; niscayam, the 
firm conclusion; tatra tyage, regarding that tyaga, 
regarding these alternative veiws on tyaga and 
sannyasa as they have been shown. Hi, for; 
purusavyaghra, O greatest among men; tyagah, 
tyaga; samprakirtitah, has been clearly declared, 
has been distinctly spoken of in the scriptures; to 
be trividhah, of three kinds, threefold, under the 
classes of tamasa (those based on tamas [Tamas: 
darkness, mental darkness, ignorance; one of the 
three qualities of everything in Nature. Also see 14.8, 
and note under 2.45.-Tr.], etc. The Lord has 
used the word tyaga with the idea that the 
(primary) meanings of tyaga and sannyasa are 
verily the same. Since it is difficult to comprehend 
this idea, that the primary meanings of the words 
tyaga and sannyasa can be threefold under the 
classification based on tamas etc. in the case of one 
who is unenlightened and who is qualified for rites 
and duties-but not in the case of one who has 
realized the supreme Goal-,therefore no one else is 
capable of speaking the truth in this connection. 
Hence, listen to the firm conclusion of the Lord 
with regard to the supreme Truth as revealved by 
the scriptures. Which, again, is this firm 
conclusion? In reply the Lord says: 
18.5 The practice of sacrifice, charity and austerity 
is not to be abandoned; it is surely to be 
undertaken. Sacrifice, charity and austerity are 
verily the purifiers of the wise. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.5 Yajna-dana-tapah-karma, the practice of 
sacrifice, charity and austerity-this threefold 
practice; na tyajyam, is not to be abandoned; tat, it; 
is eva, surely; karyam, to be undertaken. Why? 
Yajnah, sacrifice; danam, charity; and tapah, 
austerity; are eva, verily; pavanani, the purifiers, 
the causes of sanctification; manisinam, of the wise, 
i.e. of those who do not seek results for themselves. 
18.6 But even these actions have to be undertaken 
by renouncing attachment and (hankering for) 
results. This is My firm and best conclusion, O 
Parhta. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.6 Tu, but; api, even; etani, these; karmani, 
actions, viz sacrifice, charity and austerity, which 
have been spoken of as purifiers; kartavyani, have 
to be undertaken; tyaktva, by renouncing; sangam, 
attachment to them; and by giving up (hankering 
for) their phalani, results. Iti, this; is me, My; 
niscitam, firm; and uttamam, best; matam, 
conculsion. Having promised, 'hear from Me the 
firm conclusion regarding that (tyaga)' (4) and also 
adduced the reason that they are purifiers, the 
utterance, 'Even these actions have to be 
performed. This is the firm and best conclusion', is 
only by way of concluding the promised subject matter; this sentence does not introduce a fresh 
topic. For it stands to reason that the phrase 'even 
these' refers to some immediate topic under 
discussion. The implication of the word api (even) 
is: 'Even these acts, which are causes of bondage to 
one who has attachment and who hankers after 
their results, have to be undertaken by a seeker of 
Liberation.' But the phrase 'even these' is not used 
in relation to other acts. Others explain (thus): 
Since the nityakarmas have no results, therefore (in 
their case) it is illogical to say, 'by giving up 
attachment and (hankering for their) results'. The 
meaning of the phrase etani api (even these) is that, 
'even these rites and duties, which are undertaken 
for desired results and are different from the 
nityakarmas, have to be undertaken. What to speak 
of the nityakarmas like sacrifice, charity and 
austerity!' (Reply:) This is wrong since it has been 
established by the text, 'sacrifice, charity and 
austerity are verily the purifiers,' that even the 
nityakarmas have results. For a seeker of 
Liberation who wants to give up even the 
nityakarmas from fear of their being causes of 
bondage, how can there be any association with 
actions done for desired results? Moreover, the 
phrase etani api cannot apply to actions done for 
desired results (kamyakarmas), since they have 
been denigrated in, '...indeed, actions is quite 
inferior' (2.49), and in, '...by actions other than that 
action meant for God' (3.9), and since, on the 
strength of the texts [Which support the two earlier 
arguments.], 'the Vedas have the three qualities as 
their object' (2.45), 'Those who are versed in the 
Vedas, who are drinkers of Soma,...(pray for the 
heavenly goal by worshipping) Me' (9.20), and 
'they enter into the human world on the exhaustion 
of their merit' (9.21), it has been definitely stated 
that actions done for desired results are causes of 
bondage; and also because they are far removed 
from the context. 
18.7 The abandoning of daily obligatory acts 
(nityakamas) is not justifiable. Giving up that 
through delusion is declared to be based on tamas. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.7 Therefore, sannyasah, the abandoning; 
niyatasya tu karmanah, of the daily obligatory acts, 
by the seeker of Liberation who is as yet 
unenlightened and is fit for rites and duites; na 
apapadyate, is not justifiable, because what is 
desired is the purification of unenlightened 
persons. Parityagah, giving up; tasya, of that, of the 
daily obligatory duty; mohat, through delusion, 
through ignorance; parikirtitah, is declared; to be 
tamasah, based on tamas. Niyata is that duty 
which must be performed. That an act is niyata 
(obligatory) and it is relinquished is contradictory.
Therefore the giving up of that through delusion is 
declared to be based on tamas, for delusion is 
tamas. Besides, 
18.8 Whatever action one may relinquish merely as 
being painful, from fear of physical suffering, he, 
having resorted to renunciation based on rajas, will 
surely not acquire the fruits of renunciation. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.8 Yat, whatever; karma, action; tyajet, one may 
relinquish, eva, merely; iti, as being; kuhkham, 
painful; [As being impossible to accomplish.] kaya klesa-bhayat, from fear of physical suffering, out of 
fear of bodily pain; sah, he; krtva, having resorted; 
tyagam, to renunciation; rajasam, based on rajas, 
arising from rajas; will eva, surely; na labhet (shuld 
rather be labhate), not acquire; tyaga-phalam, fruits 
of renunciation, the result called Liberation, which 
follows from renunciation of all actions as a 
consequence of Illumination. Which, again, is the 
renunciation based on sattva? 
18.9 Whatever obligatory duty is performed just 
because it is a bounden duty, O Arjuna, by giving 
up attachment and the result as well,-that 
renunciation is considered to be based on sattva. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.9 Yat, whatever; niyatam karma, daily 
obligatory duty; kriyate, is performed, 
accomplished; iti eva, just because; it is karyam, a 
bounden duty; O Arjuna, tyaktva, by giving up; 
sangam, attachment; and phalam, the result; ca 
eva, as well; sah, that; tyagah, renunciation, giving 
up of attachment and (hankering for) the resutls of 
daily obligatory duties; matah, is considered; to be 
sattvikah, based on sattva, arising from sattva. We 
said that the Lord's utterance is proof of the 
fruitfulness of daily obligatory duties. Or, even if 
the niyakarmas be understood (from the Lord's 
worlds) to be fruitless, still the ignorant man does 
certainly imagine that the nityakarmas (daily 
obligatory duites) when performed produce for 
oneself a result either in the form of purification of 
the mind or avoidance of evil. As to this, the Lord 
aborts even that imagination by saying, 'by giving 
up the result'. Hence it has been well said, 'by 
giving up attachment and the result'. Objection: 
Well, is not the threefold relinquishment of actions, 
also called sannyasa, under discussion? As regards 
this, the renunciation based on tamas and rajas 
have been stated. Why is the relinquishment of 
attachment and (desire for their) results spoken of 
here as the third? This is like somebody saying, 
'Three Brahmanas have come. Of them two are 
versed in the six auxiliaries [The six auxiliaries are: 
Siksa (Phonetics), Kalpa (Code of Rituals and 
Sacrifices), Vyakarana (Grammar), Nirukta 
(Etymology), Chandas (Meter, Prosody), and 
Jyotisa (Astronomy).-Tr.] of the Vedas; the third is 
a Ksatirya!' Reply: This is not wrong, for this is 
meant as a eulogy on the basis of the common 
factor of renunciation. Between renunciation of 
actions and renunciation. of hankering for results, 
there is, indeed, the similarity of the fact of 
renunciation. While on this subject, by condemning 
'renunciation of actions' on account of its being 
based on rajas and tamas, the 'renunciation of 
desire for results of actions' is being praised on 
account of its being based on sattva, by saying, 
'that renunciation is considered to be based on 
sattva.' The internal organ of a person who is 
qualified for rites and duties, who performs the 
nityakarmas by giving up attachment and 
hankering for results, becomes pure on account of 
its being untainted by attachment to results etc. 
and refined by the nitya-karmas. When it is pure 
and tranquil, it becomes capable of contemplating 
on the Self. Since, for that very person whose 
internal organ has become purified by performing 
the nityakarmas and who has become ready for the 
knowledge of the Self, the process by which he can 
become steadfast in it has to be stated, therefore the 
Lord says: 
18.10 The man of renunciation who has become 
imbued with sattva, who is wise and freed from 
doubts, does not hate unbefitting action, nor does 
he become attached to befitting activity. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.10 Na devesti, he does not hate; akusalam, 
unbefitting; karma, action, rites and duties meant 
for desired results-with the idea, 'What is the 
usefulness of this which is a cause of 
transmigration through fresh embodiment?' Na 
anusajjate, he does not become attached to; kusale, 
befitting activity, daily obligatory duties, by 
thinking that this is the cause of Liberation by 
virtue of its being the cause of purification of the 
mind, rise of Knowledge and steadfastness in it. 
That is to say, he does not entertain any liking even 
for it, because he finds no purpose in it. Who, 
again, is he? Tyagi, the man of renunciation, who 
has become so by having given up attachment and 
rewards of action in the manner stated above. He is 
a tyagi who performs nityakarmas by 
relinquishing attachment to those acts and (their) 
results. Again, it is being stated as to when that 
person does not hate an unbefitting act and does 
not become attached to a befitting activity: When 
he has become sattva-samavistah, imbued with 
sattva, i.e., when he is filled with, possessed of, 
sattva, which is the means to the knowledge that 
discriminates between the Self and the not-Self; 
and hence medhavi, wise-endowed with 
intelligence (medha), intuitive experience, 
characterized as knowledge of the Self; one 
possessed of that is medhavai (wise)-; and owing 
to the very fact of being wise, chinnasamsayah, 
freed from doubts-one whose doubts created by 
ignorance have been sundered, one who is freed 
from doubts by his firm conviction that nothing 
but abiding in the ture nature of the Self is the 
supreme means to the highest Good. The person 
competent (for rites and duties) who, having 
gradually become purified in mind through the 
practice of Karma-yoga in the way described 
above, has realized as his own Self the actionless 
Self, which is devoid of modifications like birth 
etc., he, '...having given up all actions mentally, 
remaining at without doing or causing (others) to 
do anything at all' (cf. 5.13), attains steadfastness in 
Knowledge, which is characterized as 'actionless ness'. In this way, the purpose of the aforesaid 
Karma-yoga has been stated through the present 
verse. On the other hand, since, for the 
unenlightened person-who, while being qualified 
(for rites and duties), holds on to the body owing 
to the erroneous conception that the body is the 
Self, and who has the firm conviction, 'I am the 
agent,' because of the persistence of his idea that 
the Self is the agent-it is not possible to renounce 
actions totally, therefore he has competence only 
for performing enjoined duties by giving up fruits 
of actions. But he is not to renounce them (actions). 
In order to point out this idea the Lord says: 
18.11 Since it is not possible for one who holds on 
to a body to give up actions entirely, therefore he, 
on the other hand, who renounces results on 
actions is called a man of renunciation. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.11 Deha-bhrta, for one who holds on to a body one who maintains (bibharti) a body (deha) is 
called a deha-bhrt. One who has self indentification with the body is called a deha-bhrt, 
but not a so a man of discrimination; for he has 
been excluded from the eligibility for agentship by 
such texts as, 'He who knows this One is 
indestructible...' etc. Hence, for that unenlightened 
person who holds on to the body, he, since; it is na, 
not; sakyam, possible; tyaktum, to give up, 
renounce; karmani, actions; asesatah, entirely, 
totally; therefore the ignorant person who is 
competent (for rites and duties), yah, who; tu, on 
the other hand; karma-phala-tyagi, renounces 
results of actions, relinquishes only the hankering 
for the results of actions while performing the 
nityakarmas; sah, he; is abhidhiyate, called; tyagi 
iti, a man of renunciation-even though he 
continues to be a man of rites and duties. This is 
said by way of eulogy. Therefore total renunciation 
of actions is possible only for one who has realized 
the supreme Truth, who does not hold on to the 
body, and who is devoid of the idea that the body 
is the Self. Again, what is that purpose which is 
accomplished through renunciation of all actions? 
This is being stated: 
18.12 The threefold results of actions-the 
undesirable, the desirable, and the mixed-accrues 
after death to those who do not resort to 
renunciation, but never to those who resort to 
monasticism. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.12 These trividham, threefold-of three kinds; 
phalam, results; karmanah, of actions characterized 
as the righteous and the unritheous; anistam, the 
undesirable, consisting in (birth in) hell, (among) 
animals, etc.; istam, the desirable, consisting in 
(birth as) gods and others; and misram, the mixed, 
having a mixture of the desirable and the 
undesirable, consisting in (birht as) human beings;-
these results that are of these kinds, bhavati, 
accrues; pretya, after death, after the fall of the 
body; atyaginam, to those who do not resort to 
renunciation, to the unilllumined, the men with 
rites and duties, who are not men of renunciation 
in the truest sense. The derivative sense of the 
word phala (pha-la) is this: On accunt of being 
accomplished through the operation of diverse 
external accessories, and a result of ignorance, 
comparable to the charm cast by jugglery, a source 
of great delusion and appearing as though close to 
the indwelling Self, it is phalgu (unsubstantial), 
and as a consequence it undergoes layam 
(disappearance). (The result that is of this kind 
accrues to those who do not resort to renunciation). 
Tu, but; na kvacit, never; sannyasinam, to those 
who resort tomonasticism for the sake of the 
highest Reality, to the class of monks called 
paramahamsas who remain steadfast in 
Knowledge alone. For, it cannot be that those who 
are devoted wholly to steadfastness in complete 
enlightenment do not dig out the seed of 
transmigration. This is the meaning. Therefore it is 
only for those who have realized the supreme 
Truth that it is possible to become a monk who 
renounces actions totally, because action, 
accessories and results are superimmpositions on 
the Self through ignorance. But the renunciation of 
all actions is not possible for an unenlightened 
person who perceives the locus (the body etc.), 
action, agentship and accessories as the Self. This 
the Lord shows in the following verses: 
18.13 O mighty-armed one, learned from Me these 
[Another reading is etani.-Tr.] five factors for the 
accomplishment of all actions, which have been 
spoken of in the Vedanta in which actions 
terminate. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.13 O mighty-armed one, nibodha, learn; me, 
from Me; imani, these; panca, five; karanani, 
factors, accessories, which are going to be stated for drawing the attention of his (Arjuna's) mind 
and for showing the difference among these 
categories [Categories: locus (body) etc], the Lord 
praises those accessories in the succeeding verses 
as fit for being known-; siddhaye, for the 
accomplishment; sarva-karmanam, of all actions; 
proktani, which have been spoken of; sankhye, in 
Vedanta-sankhya is that scripture where the 
subject-matters [In the sentence, 'Thou art That', 
the word Thou means the individual Self, and That 
means Brahman. The comprehension of their unity, 
and also 'hearing, reflection and meditation' are 
referred to as the subject-matters.] to be known are 
fully (samyak) stated (khyayante)-; krtante, in 
which actions terminate. Krtante qualifies that very 
word (Vedanta). Krtam mean action. That in which 
occurs the culmination (anta) of that krtam is 
krtantam, i.e. the termination of actions. In the 
texts, '...as much utility as a man has in a well' 
(2.46), and 'O son of Prtha, all actions in their 
totality culminate in Knowledge' (4.33), the Lord 
shows the cessation of all actions when the 
knowledge of the Self dawns. Hence (it is said): 
'...which have been spoken of in that Vedanta 
where actions culminate and which is meant for 
the knowledge of the Self.' Which are they? This is 
being answered: 
18.14 The locus as also the agent, the different 
kinds of organs, the many and distinct activities, 
and, the divine is here the fifth. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.14 Adhisthanam, the locus, the body, which is 
the seat, the basis, of the manifestation of desire, 
hatred, happiness, sorrow, knowledge, etc.; tatha, 
as also karta, the agent, the enjoyer [The individual 
Self which has intelligence etc. as its limiting 
adjuncts, due to which it appears to possess their 
characteristics and become identified with them.] 
who has assumed the characteristics of the limiting 
adjuncts; prthak vidham, the different kinds of; 
karanam, organs, the ears etc. which, twelve [The 
five organs of knowledge (eyes, ears, nose, tongue 
and skin), the five organs of actions (hands, feet, 
speech, organ of excertion and that of generation), 
the mind and the intellect.] in number, are of 
different kinds for the experience of sound etc.; the 
vividhah, many; and prthak, distinct; cesta, 
activities connected with air-exhalation, inhalation, 
etc.; ca eva, and; daivam, the divine, i.e. the Sun 
and the others who are the presiding deities of the 
eye etc.; is atra, here, in relation to these four; 
pancamam, the fifth-completing the five. 
18.15 Whatever action a man performs with the 
body, speech and mind, be it just or its reverse, of it 
these five are the cuases. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.15 Yat, whatever; karma, action; narah, a man; 
prarabhate, performs; with these three-sarira-van manobhih, with the body, speech and mind; be it 
nyayyam, just, rigtheous, conforming to the 
scriptures; va, or; viparitam, its reverse, not 
conforming to the scriptures, unrighteous; and 
even such activities like closing the eyes etc. whch 
are consequent on the fact of living (i.e. instinctive 
acts)-they also are certainly the result of righteous 
and unrighteous acts done in earlier lives, and 
hence they are understood by the very, use of the 
words 'just and its reverse'-; tasya, of it, of all 
activities without exception; ete, these; panca, five, 
as mentioned; are the hetavah, causes. Objection: 
Well, are not the locus etc. the cause of all actions? 
Why is it said, '...performs with the body, speech 
and mind'? Reply: This fault does not arise. All 
actions described as 'enjoined' or 'prohibited' are 
mainly based on the three, body etc. Seeing, 
hearing, etc., which are characteristics of life and 
are subsidiaries to these (body etc.) [Seeing etc. are 
accomplished by the eye etc., which are part and 
parcel of the body etc.] , are divided into three 
groups and spoken of in, 'performs with the body,' 
etc. Even at the time of reaping the fruits (of 
actions), they are experienced mainly through 
these (three). Hence, there is no contradiction with 
the assertion that the five are the causes. 
18.16 This being the case, anyone, who, owing to 
the imperfection of his intellect, perceives the 
absolute Self as the agent, that man does not 
perceive (properly), and has a perverted intellect. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.16 Tatra is used for connecting with the topic 
under discussion. Tatra evam sati, this being the 
case, when actions are thus accomplished by the 
five causes mentioned above;-this portion has to be 
connected with 'perverted intellect' by way of 
causality [Actions are done by the body etc., but 
since a person thinks that the Self is the agent, 
therefore he is said to have a perverted intellect.]-
yah, tu, anyone, an unenlightened person, who; 
pasyati, perceives; kevalam, the absolute, pure; 
atmanam, Self; as the kartaram, agent-thinking, 'I 
myself am the agent of the actions being done by 
them', as a consequence of imagining the Self as 
identified with them; why?-akrta-buddhitvat, 
owing to the imperfection of his intellect, owing to 
his intellect not having been refined by the 
instructions of Vedanta and the teachers, and by 
reasoning-. Even the person who, believing in the 
Self as distinct from the body etc., looks upon the 
distinct [Ast. omits anyam (distinct).-Tr.], absolute 
Self as the agent, he, too, is surely of imperfect 
intellect. Hence, owing to his having an imperfect 
intellect, sah, that man; na, does not; pasyati, 
perceive (properly) either the truth about the Self 
or about actions. This is the meaning. Therefore he 
is a durmatih, man of perverted intellect, in the 
sense that his intellect is contemptible, perverse, 
corrupted, and the cause of repeatedly undergoing 
births and deaths. He does not perceive even while 
seeing-like the man suffering from Timira seeing 
many moons, or like one thinking the moon to be 
moving when (actually) the clouds are moving, or 
like the one seated on some conveyance (e.g. 
palanquin), thinking oneself to be moving when 
others (the bearers) are moving. Who, again, is the 
man of right intellect who perceives correctly? This 
is being answered: 
18.17 He who has not the feeling of egoism, whose 
intellect is not tainted, he does not kill, nor does he 
become bound-even by killing these creatures! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.17 Yasya, he who, the person whose intellect is 
refined by the instructions of the scriptures and the 
teachers, and reason; who has na, not; ahankrtah 
bhavah, the feeling of egoism, in whom does not 
occur the notion in the form, 'I am the agent'; i.e., 
he who sees thus: 'These five, viz locus etc. (14), 
imagined in the Self through ignorance, are verily 
the agents of all actions; not I. But I am the 
absolute, unchanging witness of their functions, 
'Without vita force, without mind, pure, superior 
to the (other) superior immutable (Maya)" (Mu.2.1.1)'; 
yasya, whose; buddhih, intellect, the 
internal organ, which is the limiting adunct of the 
Self; is na, not; lipyate, tainted, does not become 
regretful thinking, 'I have done this; as a result, I 
shall enter into hell'; whose intellect does not 
become thus tainted, he has a good intellect and he 
perceives (rightly). Api, even; hatva, by killing; 
iman, these; lokan, creatures, i.e. all living beings; 
sah he; does not hanti, kill-he does not perform the 
act of killing; nor does he nibadhyate, become 
bound, nor even does he become connected with 
its result, the fruit of an unrighteous action. 
Objection: Even if this be a eulogy, is it not 
contradictory to say, 'even by killing he does not 
kill'? Reply: This defect does not arise; for this 
becomes logical from the ordinary and the 
enlightened points of view. By adopting the 
empirical point of view (which consists in 
thinking), 'I am the slayer', by identifying the body 
with the Self, the Lord says, 'even by killing'; and, 
by taking His stand on the supreme Truth as 
explained above (the Lord says), 'he does not kill, 
nor does he become bound'. Thus both these surely 
become reasonable. Objection; Is it not that the Self 
certainly does act in combination with the locus
etc., which conclusion follows from the use of the 
word kevala (absolute) in the text, 'the absolute Self 
as the agent' (16)? Reply: There is not such fault, 
because, the Self being changeless by nature, there 
is no possiblity of Its becoming united with the 
locus etc. For it is only a changeful entity that can 
possibly be united with another, or come to have 
agentship through combination. But, for the 
changeless Self there can be no combination with 
anything whatsoever. Hence, agentship through 
combination is not logical. Therefore, the 
absoluteness of the Self being natural, the word 
kevalam is merely a reiteration of an established 
fact. And the changelessness of the Self is well 
known from the Upanisads, the Smrtis and logic. 
As to that, in the Gita itself this has been 
established more than once in such texts as, 'It is 
said that...This is unchangeable' (2.25), 'Actions are 
being done by the gunas themselves' (see 3.27), 
'this ...supreme Self does not act...although existing 
in the body' (13.31), and in the Upanisads also in 
such texts as, 'It thinks, as it were, and shakes, as it 
were' (Br. 4.3.7). And from the standpoint of reason 
also, the royal path is to hold that the true nature of 
the Self is that It is partless, independent of others 
and changeless. Even if mutability (of the Self) be 
accepted, It should have a change that is Its own. 
The functions of the locus etc. cannot be attributed 
to the agency of the Self. Indeed, an action done by 
someone else cannot be imputed to another by 
whom it has not been done! As for what is imputed 
(on somebody) through ignorance, that is not his. 
As the quality of silver is not of nacre, or as surface 
or dirt attributed through ignorance to the sky by 
foolish people is not of the sky, similarly, the 
changes in the locus etc. also are verily their own, 
and not of the Self. Hence it has been well said that 
the enlightened person 'does not kill, nor is he 
bound', becuase of the absence of his being tainted 
by the idea that actions are done by himself. [Some 
translate this portion thus: '...because of the 
absence of the thought 'I am doing', and also due to 
the taintlessness of the mind'; or, '...in the absence 
of egotism and of all taint in the mind'.-Tr.] After 
having declared, 'This One does not kill, nor is It 
killed' (2.19); having stated the immutability of the 
Self through such texts as, 'Never is this One born' 
(2.20) , etc., which adduce the reason for this; 
having briefly stated at the commencement of the 
Scripture-in, 'he who knows this One as 
indestructible' (2.21)-that the enlightened man has 
no eligibility for rites and duties; and having 
deliberated in various places on that (cessation) 
which has been mooted in the middle (of the 
Scripture), the Lord, by way of summarizing the 
purport of the Scripture, concludes here by saying 
that the enlightened person 'does not kill, nor does 
he become bound.' If this be so, then it becomes 
established that the three kinds of results of 
actions, viz the undesirable etc., do not accrue to 
the monks, since it is reasonable that, because of 
the illogicality of their entertaining the idea of 
being embodied, all actions resulting from 
ignorance become abandoned (by them). And 
hence, as a consequence of a reversal of this, it 
becomes inevitable that the results do accrue to 
others. Thus, this is how the purport of the 
scripture Gita has been summed up. In order that 
this which is the essence of the teachings of all the 
Vedas should be. understood after deliberation by 
the learned ones possessing a sharp intellect, it has 
been explained by us in accordance with the 
scriptures and reasoning, in various places by 
dealing with it topically. Thereafter, now is being 
stated what promts actions: 
18.18 Knowledge, the object the knowledge and the 
knower-this is the threefold inducement to action. 
The comprehension of actions comes under three 
heads-the instruments, the object and the subject. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.18 Jnanam, knowledge (-being derived in the 
sense of 'that through which something is known', 
jnana means knowledge concerning all things in 
general-): so also jneyam, the object of knowledge 
(-that also is a reference to all objects in general-); 
similarly, parijnata, the knower, the experiencer, a 
product of ignorance, who partakes of the nature 
of the limiting adjuncts;-thus, this tripartite group 
formed by these is the trividha, threefold; karma codana, inducement ot action, inducer of all actions 
in general. For, it is when the three, viz knowledge 
etc., combine that commencement of all actions 
meant either for acceptance or rejection 
[Acceptance, rejection or indifference.] are possible. 
After that, what are initiated by the five, viz locus 
etc., and are grouped in three ways according to 
the differences of their being based on speech, 
mind and body become comprehended under the 
three, viz instrument etc. This is what is being 
stated: Karma-sangrahah, the comprehension [It is 
well know that actions are based on the three instrument etc.] of actions; iti, comes under; 
trividhah, three heads, three classes; viz karanam, 
the instrument (-derived in the sense of that 
through which anything is done-), i.e. the external 
(organs) (ear etc.) and the internal (organs) 
(intellect etc.); karma, the object (-derivatively 
meaning that which is most cherished by the 
subject and is achieved through an act-); and karta, 
the subject (agent), who employs the instrument 
etc., who partakes of the nature of the limiting 
adjuncts. Sangrahah is derived thus: that in which 
something is comprehended. The comprehension 
of action (karma) is karma-sangrahah. Indeed, 
action becomes included in these three. Hence is 
this 'threefold comprehension of action'. Now then, 
since action, instrument and result are all 
constituted by the gunas, it becomes necessary to 
state the three fold variety in them based on the 
differences among the gunas, viz sattva, rajas and 
tamas. Hence it is begun: 
18.19 Knowledge, action and agent are stated in the 
teaching about the gunas to be only of three kinds 
according to the differences of the gunas. Hear 
about them also as they are. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.19 Jnanam, knowledge; karma, action-not the 
objective case in the technical sense, which is 
defined as 'that which is most cheirshed by the 
subject'; and karta, agent, the accomplisher of 
actions; procyate, are stated; guna-sankhyane, in 
the teaching about the gunas, in the philosophy of 
Kapila; to be eva, only (-only is used for emphasis, 
by way of showing that they have no classification 
other than that based on the gunas-); tridha, of 
three kinds; guna-bhedatah, according to the 
differences of the gunas, i.e. according to the 
differences of sattva etc. Even that philosophy 
teaching about the gunas is certainly vaild so far as 
it concerns the experiencer of the gunas, though it 
is contradictory so far as the non-duality of the 
supreme Reality, Brahman, is concerned. Those 
followers of Kapila are acknoweldge authorities in 
the ascertainment of the functions of the gunas and 
their derivatives. Hence, that scripture, too, is 
being referred to by way of eulogy of the subject matter going to be spoken of. Therefore there is no 
contradiction. Srnu, hear; tani, about them; api, 
also; yathavat, as they are, as established by reason 
and as propounded in the scriptures. Hear about 
knowledge etc. and all their diversities created by 
the differences of the gunas. The idea is , 
'Concentrate your mind on the subject going to be 
taught.' And now the threefold classification of 
knowledge is being stated: 
18.20 Know that knowledge to be originating from 
sattva through which one sees a single, 
undecaying, undivided Entity in all the diversified 
things. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.20 Viddhi, know; tat, that; jnanam, knowledge, 
realization of the Self as non-dual, complete 
realization; to be sattvikam, originating from 
sattva; yena, through which knowledge; iksate, one 
sees; ekam, a single; avyayam, undecaying-that 
which does not undergo mutation either in itself or 
by the mutation of its qualities-' i.e. eternal and 
immutable; bhavam, Entity-the word bhava is used 
to imply an entity-, i.e. the single Reality which is 
the Self; sarvabhutesu, in all things, in all things 
begining from the Unmanifest to the unmoving 
things; and through which knowledge one sees 
that Entity to be avibhaktam, undivided; in every 
body, vibhaktesu, in all the deversified things, in 
the different bodies. The idea is: that Reality which 
is the Self remains, like Space, undivided. Being 
based on rajas and tamas, those that are the 
dualistic philosophies are incomplete, and hence 
are not by themselves adequate for the eradication 
of worldly existence. 
18.21 But know that knowledge to be originating 
from rajas which, amidst all things, apprehends the 
different entities of various kinds as distinct [As 
possessing distinct selves.]. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.21 Tu, but; viddhi, know; tat, that; jnanam, 
knowledge; to be rajasam, originating from rajas; 
yat, which; sarvesu bhutesu, amidst all things; 
vetti, apprehends-since knowledge cannot be an 
agent of hends-since knowledge cannot be an agent 
of action, therefore the meaning implied is, 'that, 
knowledge...through which one apprehends...'-; 
nana-bhavan, the different entities; prthagvidhan, 
of various kinds, i.e., those possessing diverse 
characteristics and different from oneself; 
prthakrvena, as distinct, as separate in each body. 
18.22 But that (knowledge) is said to be born of 
tamas which is confined to one form as though it 
were all, which is irrational, not concern with truth 
and triivial. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.22 But tat, that knowledge; is udahrtam, said to 
be; tamasam, born of tamas; yat, which is; saktam, 
confined; ekasmin, to one; karye, from, to one body 
or to an external image etc., krtsnavat, as though it 
were all, as though it comprehended everything, 
thinking, 'The Self, or God, is only this much; there 
is nothing beyond it,'-as the naked Jainas hold that 
the soul conforms to and has the size of the body, 
or (as others hold) that God is merely a stone or 
wood-, remaining confined thus to one form; 
ahaitukam, which is irrational, bereft of logic; a tattvarthavat, not concerned with truth-tattvartha, 
truth, means some-thing just as it is; that 
(knowledge) which has this (truth) as its object of 
comprehension is tattvarthavat; that without this is 
; a-tattvarthavat-; and which, on account of the 
very fact of its being irrational, is alpam, trivial, 
because it is concerned with trifles or is productive 
of little result. This kind of knowledge is indeed 
found in non-discriminating creatures in whom 
tamas predominates. Now is being stated the 
threehold division of action: 
18.23 The daily obligatory action which is 
performed without attachment and without likes 
or dislikes by one who does not hanker for 
rewards, that is said to be born of sattva. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.23 Niyatam, the daily obligatory; karma, action; 
yat, which; is krtam, performed; sanga-rahitam, 
without attachment; araga-dvesatah, without likes 
or dislikes; aphala-prepsuna, by one who does not 
hanker for rewards, by an agent who is the 
opposite of one who is desirous of the fruits of 
action; tat, that (action); ucyate, is said to be; 
sattvikam, born of sattva. 
18.24 But that action is said to be born of rajas 
which is done by one desirous of results or by one 
who is egotistic, and which is highly strenuous. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.24 But tat, that; karma, action; udahrtam, is said 
to be; rajasam, born of rajas; yat, which; is kriyate, 
done; kamepsuna by one desirous of results; va, or; 
saahankarena, by one who is egotistic; and 
bahulaayasam, which is highly strenuous, 
accomplished by the agent with great effort. 
'Egotistic' is not used in contrast to knowledge of 
Truth. What then? It is used in contrast to the 
absence of egotism in an ordinary person versed in 
the Vedic path. For in the case of the knower of the 
Self, who is not egotistic in the real sense, there is 
no question of his being desirous of results or of 
being an agent of actions requiring great effort. 
Even of actions born of sattva, the agent is one who 
has not realized the Self and is possessed of 
egoism; what to speak of actions born of rajas and 
tamas! In common parlance, a person versed in the 
Vedic path, even though not possessing knowledge 
of the Self, is spoken of as being free from egotism 
thus-'This Brahmana is free from egotism'. 
Therefore, 'sahan-karena va' is said in contrast to 
him only. Punah (again) is used to complete the 
meter. 
18.25 That action is said to be born of tamas which 
is undertaken out of delusion, (and) without 
consideration of its consequence, loss, harm and 
ability. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.25 Tat, that; karma, action; yat, which; is 
arabhyate, undertaken; mohat, out of delusion, 
non-discrimination; anapeksya, without 
consideration of; its anubandham, consequence, 
the result which accrues later; ksayam, loss-that 
losss which is incurred in the form of loss of energy 
or loss of wealth in the course of any action; 
himsam, harm, suffering to creatures; and 
paurusam, ability, prowess-one's own ability fest 
as, 'I shall be able to complete this task';-without 
consideration of these, from 'consequence' to 
'ability', ucyate, is said to be; tamasam, born of 
tamas. 
18.26 [Ast. introduces this verse with 'Idanim 
kartrbhedah ucyate, Now is being stated the 
distinctions among the agents.'-Tr.] The agent who 
is free from attachment [Attachment to results or 
the idea of agentship.], not egotistic, endowed with 
fortitude and diligence, and unperturbed by 
success and failure is said to be possessed of sattva. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.26 Karta, the agent; who is mukta-sangah, free 
from attachment-one by whom attachment has 
been given up; anahamvadi, not egotisic, not given 
to asserting his ego; dhrti-utsaha-samanvitah, 
endowed with fortitude and diligenc; and 
nirvikarah, unperturbed; siddhi-asiddhyoh, by 
success and failure, in the fruition and non-fruition 
of any action under-taken-led only by the authority 
of the scriptures, not by attachment to results etc. 
[Etc. stands for attachment to work.];-the agent 
who is such, he is ucyate, said to be; sattvikah, 
possessed of sattva. 
18.27 The agent who has attachment, who is 
desirous of the results of actions, covetous, cruel by 
nature, unclean and subject to joy and sorrow is 
declared to be possessed of rajas. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.27 Karta, the agent; ragi, who has attachment; 
karma-phala-prepsuh, who is desirous of the 
results of actions; lubdhah, covetous, greedy for 
other's property, and does not part with his own
(when) at holy places; himsatmakah, cruel by 
nature, having a nature that cuases pain to others; 
asucih, unclean, devoid of internal and external 
cleanliness; and harsa-soka-anvitah, subject to joy 
and sorrow, affected by these two, joy and sorrow joy at the acquisition of desired objects, sorrow at 
getting undesired objects and losing coverted 
objects; and elation and dejection may occur to that 
very person from his actions being aided or 
hindered; one who is subject to those-; parikirtitah, 
is declared to be; rajasah, possessed of rajas. 
18.28 The agent who is unsteady, naive, 
unbending, deceitful, wicked, [A variant reading is 
naikrtikah.-Tr.] lazy, morose and procrastinating is 
said to be possessed of tamas. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.28 The agent who is ayuktah, unsteady; 
prakrtah, naive, of very unrefined intelligence, like 
a child; stabdhah, unbending like a staff-he does 
not bend down to anyone; sathah, deceitful, 
cunning, hiding his own powers; naiskrtikah, 
wicked, given to destroying the livelihood of 
others; alasah, lazy, not inclined even to his own 
duties; visadi, morose, ever in a mood of dejection; 
and dirghasutri, procrastinating, postponing duties 
for long, [Ast. adds here, 'sarvada 
mandasvabhavah, always slow by nature'.-Tr.] not 
accomplishing even in a month what is to be done 
today or tomorrow;-one who is such, he ucyate, is 
said to be; tamasah, possessed of tamas. 
18.29 O Dhananjaya, listen to the classification of 
the intellect as also of fortitude, which is threefold 
according to the gunas, while it is being stated 
elaborately and severally. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.29 O Dhananjaya, srnu, listen; bhedam, to the 
classification; buddheh, of the intellect; ca eva, as 
also; the classification dhrteh, of fortitude; 
trividham, which is threefold; gunatah, according 
to the gunas, sattva etc. -this much is an apporistic 
statement-; procyamanam, while it is being stated; 
asesena, elaborately, just as it is, without omitting 
anything; and prthaktvena, severally. Arjuna is 
called Dhananjaya because, in the course of his 
expedition to conquer all the qaurters. he won 
immense human and divine wealth (dhana). 
18.30 O Partha, that intellect is born of sattva which 
understands action and withdrawal, duty and 
what is not duty, the sources of fear and 
fearlessness, and bondage and freedom. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.30 O Partha, sa, that; buddhih, intellect; is 
sattviki, born of sattva; ya, which; vetti, 
understands; pravrttim, action, the path of rites 
and duties, which is the cause of bondage; and 
nivrttim, withdrawal, the path of renunciation, 
which is the cause of Liberation-since action and 
withdrawal are mentioned in the same sentence 
along with bondage and freedom, therefore they 
mean 'the path of rites and duties and of 
renunciation'-; karya-akarye, duty and what is not 
duty, i.e. what is enjoined or prohibited, [Ast. adds 
laukike vaidike va (ordinary or Vedic injunctions 
and prohibitions) after vihita-pratisiddhe; and it 
adds sastrabuddheh before kartavya-akartavye-
what ougth to be done or ought not to be done by 
one who relies on the scriptures.-Tr.] what ought to 
be done or ought not to be done, action and 
inaction. With regard to what? With regard to 
action leading to seen or unseen, results, 
undertaken according to place, time, etc. Bhaya adhaye, the sources of fear and fearlessness, i.e. the 
cuases of fear and fearlessness, with regard to seen 
or unseen objects; bandham, bondage, along with 
its cause; and moksam, freedom, along with its 
cause. In this context, knowing is a function of the 
intellect; but the intellect is the possesser of the 
function. Fortitude also is only a particular 
function of the intellect. 
18.31 O Partha, that intellect is born of rajas with 
which one wrongly understands virtue and vice as 
also what ought to be done and ought not to be 
done. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.31 O Partha, sa, that; buddhih, intellect; is rajasi, 
born of rajas; yaya, with which; prajanati, one 
understands; ayathavat, wrongly, not truly, not by 
discerning it from all points of view; dharmam, 
virtue, as prescribed by the scritpures; and 
adharmam, vice, what is prohibited by them; [By 
dharma and adharma are implied the seen and the 
unseen results of actions as revealed by the 
scriptures; karya and akarya respectively refer to 
the actual doing of what ought to be done and the 
not doing of what ought not to be done.] ca eva, as 
also; karyam, what ought to be done; and akaryam, 
what ought not to be done-those very 'duty' and 
'what is not duty' as stated earlier. 
18.33 O Partha, the firmness that is unfailing 
through concentration, with which one restrains 
the functions of the mind, vital forces and the 
organs, that firmness is born of sattva. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.33 O Partha, dhrtya, the firmness; (-is connected 
with the remote word) avyabhicarinya, that is 
unfailing; yogena, through concentration, i.e. (the 
firmness that is) ever associated with samadhi 
(absorption in Brahman); yaya, with which; 
dharayate, one restrains;-what?-manah-prana-
indriya-kriyah, the functions of the mind, vital 
forces and organs-restrains them from tending 
towards the path opposed to the scriptures-. 
Indeed, when restrained with firmness, they do not 
incline towards objects prohibited by the 
scriptures. Sa, that; dhrtih, firmness, which is of 
this kind; is sattviki, born of sattva. What is mean 
is that when one restrains the functions of the 
mind, vital forces and organs with unfailing 
firmness, one does so through yoga, concentration. 
18.34 But, O Partha, the firmness with which one 
holds on to righteousness, covetable things and 
wealth, being desirous of their fruits as the 
occasion for each arises, that firmness is born of 
rajas. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.34 Tu, but, O Partha; the dhrtya, firmness; yaya, 
with which; a person dharayate, holds on to; 
dharma-kama-arthan, righteousness, covetable 
things and wealth-entertains the conviction in the 
mind that these ought to be pursued always; and 
becomes phala-akanksi, desirous of their fruits; 
prasangena, as the occasion for each arises, 
according as the situation arises for holding on to 
any one of dharma etc.; sa, that; dhrtih, firmness; is 
rajasi, born of rajas. 
18.35 That firmness is considered [Some editions 
read partha in place of mata (considered).-Tr.] to be 
born of tamas due to which a person with a corrupt 
intellect does not give up sleep, fear, sorrow, 
despondency as also sensuality. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.35 That firmness is mata, considered to be; 
tamasi, born of tamas; yaya, due to which; 
durmedha, a person with a corrupt intellect; na 
vimuncati, does not give up-indeed, holds fast to; 
svapnam, sleep; bhayam, fear; sokam, sorrow; 
visadam, despondency; eva ca, as also; madam, 
sensuality, enjoyment of objects-mentally holding 
these as things that must always be resorted to, 
considering them to be greatly important to 
himself, like a drunkard thinking of wine. The 
threefold division of action as also of agents 
according to the differences of the gunas has been 
stated. After that, now is being stated the threefold 
division of results and happiness: 
18.36 Now hear from Me, O scion of the Bharata 
dynasty, as regards the three kinds of joy: That in 
which one delights owing to habit, and certainly 
attains the cessation of sorrows; [S. and S.S. take 
the second line of this verse along with the next 
verse referring to sattvika happiness.-Tr.] 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.36 Idanim, now; srnu, hear; me, from Me i.e. be 
attentive to what I say; tu, as regards; the 
trividham, three kinds of; sukham, joy, O scion of 
the Bharata dynasty. Yatra, that in which; ramate, 
one delights, derives pleasure; abhyasat, owing to 
habit, due to frequent repetition; and in the 
experinece of which joy one nigacchati, certainly 
attains; duhkhantam, the cessation of sorrow-. 
18.37 That which is like poison in the beginning, 
but comparable to nectar in the end, and which, 
arises from the purity of one's intellect-that joy is 
spoken of as born of sattva. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.37 Yat, that joy which is; iva, like; visam, poison, 
a source of pain; agre, in the beginning-when it 
first comes in the early stages of (acquisition) of 
knowledge, detachment, meditation and 
absorption, since they involve great struggle; but 
amrtopamam, comparable to nectar; pariname, in 
the end, when it arises from the maturity of 
knowledge, detachment, etc.; and which atma buddhi-prasadajam, arises from the purity 
(prasada), trasparence like water, of one's intellect 
(atma-buddhi); tat, that; sukham, joy; is proktam, 
spoken of, by the learned ones ;as sattvikam, born 
of sattva. Or, the phrase atma-buddhi-prasadajam 
may mean 'arising from the high degree of 
clearness of that atma-buddhi (knowledge of or 
connected with the Self)'; therefore it is born of 
sattva. 
18.38 That joy is referred to as born of rajas which, 
arising from the contact of the organs and (their) 
objects, is like nectar in the beginning, but like 
poison at the end. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.38 Tat, that; sukham, joy; is smrtam, referred to; 
as rajasam, born of rajas; yat, which; visaya indriya-samyogat, arising from the contact of the 
organs and (their) objects; is amrtopamam, like 
nectar; agre, in the beginning, in the intial 
moments; but iva, like; visam, poison; pariname, at 
the end-at the end of full enjoyment of the objects 
(of the senses), because it causes loss of strength, 
vigour, beauty, wisdom, [Prajna, the capacity to 
understand whatever is heard.] retentive faculty, 
wealth and diligence, and because it is the cause of 
vice and its consequent hell etc. 
18.39 That joy is said to be born of tams which, 
both in the beginning and in the sequel, is delusive 
to oneself and arises from sleep, laziness and 
inadvertence. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.39 That joy is udahrtam, said to be; tamasam, 
born of tamas; yat, which; both agre, in the 
beginning; ca, and; anubandhe, in the sequel, after 
the end (of enjoyment); is mohanam, delusive; 
atmanah, to oneself; and nidra-alasya-pramada uttham, arises from sleep, laziness and 
inadvertence. Therefore, now is begun a verse in 
order to conclude this section [The section showing 
that all things in the whole of creation are under 
the influence of the three gunas.]. 
18.40 There is no such entity in the world or, again,
among the gods in heaven, which can be free from 
these three gunas born of Nature. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.40 Na asti, there is no; tat, such; sattvam, entity, 
living creatures like men and others, or non-living 
things; prthivyam, in the world; va punah, or, 
again; an entity devesu, among the gods; divi, in 
heaven; yat, which; syat, can be [-this is connected 
with the preceding portion 'na tat, there is no such 
(entity)'-]; muktam, free; ebhih, from these; 
trubhih, three; gunaih, gunas, sattva etc.; prakrti jaih, born of Nature. It has been said that the entire 
transmigratory state together with its roots, 
characterized by action, agent and resuls-
consisting of the gunas, sattva, rajas and tamas-, 
and projected by ignorance, is an evil. And this 
also has been said through the imagery of the Tree 
in the verse, '...which has its roots upward' etc. 
(15.1). It has been further said that, 'after felling 
that (Tree), with the strong sword of detachment, 
thereafter, that State has to be sought for' (15.3-4). 
And, as to that, since all things consist of the three 
gunas, there arises the impossibility of the 
eradication of the cause of worldly existence. 
Hence, it has to be shown how it can be eradicated. 
Besides, the purport of the scripture Gita has to be 
summed up, and it has also to be shown that the 
import of all the Vedas and the Smrtis, which must 
be put into practice by those who long for the Goal 
of human life, is verily this much. Hence begin the 
verses, 'The duties of the Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas 
and the Vaisyas...', etc. 
18.41 O scorcher of enemies, the duties of the 
Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas, as also 
of the Sudras have been fully classified according 
to the gunas born from Nature. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.41 Parantapa, O scorcher of enemies; karmani, 
the duties; brahmana-ksatriya-visam, of the 
Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas; ca, as 
also; sudranam, of the Surdras-the Sudras have not 
been included with the others (in the compund 
word) because, owing to their having a single 
birth, [Sudras have no right to be invested with the 
sacred thread which, in the case of the other three 
castes, symbolizes a second birth.] they have no 
right to (the study of) the Vedas; pravibhaktani, 
have been fully classified, have been prescribed by 
making distinctions among them;-according to 
what?-gunahi, according to the gunas; svabhava prabhavaih, born from Nature. Nature means the 
Praktrti of God, His Maya consisting of the three 
gunas. 'Born from Nature' means 'born of these 
three gunas. In accordnace with these the duties 
such as control of the internal organs, etc. of the 
Brahmanas and others have been classified. Or (the 
meaning is): The source of the nature of the 
Brahmanas is the quality of sattva. Similarly, the 
source of the nature of the Ksatriyas is rajas, with 
sattva as a subordinate (quality); the source of the 
nature of the Vaisyas is rajas, with tamas as the 
subordinate (quality); the source of the nature of 
the Sudras is tamas, with rajas as the subordinate 
(quality); for the natures of the four are seen to be 
tranquillity. lordliness, industriousness and 
dullness respectively. Or, svabhava (nature) means 
the (individual) tendencies of creatures earned in 
their past lives, which have become manifest in the 
present life for yielding their own results. The 
gunas which have that svabhava as their source 
(prabhava) are svabhava-prabhavah gunah. Since 
the manifestation of the gunas cannot logically be 
uncaused, therefore a specific cause [i.e. the 
tendencies are the efficient cause, and Nature is the 
material cause.] has been posited by saying that 
Nature is the cause. Thus, the duties such as 
control of the internal organs etc. have been 
classified in keeping with the effects of the gunas, 
sattva, rajas and tamas, which are born of Nature, 
born of Prakrti. Objection: Well, are not the duties 
like controlling the internal organs etc. of the 
Brahmanas and others classified and enjoined by 
the scriptures? Why is it said that they are 
classified according to the gunas sattva etc.? Reply: 
This objection is not valid. For, the duties like 
controlling the internal organs etc. of the 
Brahmanas and others have been classified even by 
the scriptures verily in keeping with the specific 
qualities sattva etc.; certainly, not without 
reference to the gunas. Hence, though the duties 
have been divided by the scriputres, they are said 
to have been classified according to the gunas. 
Which, again, are those duties? They are being 
spoken of: 
18.42 The natural duties of the Brahmanas are the 
control of the internal and external organs, 
austerity, purity, forgiveness, straightforwardness, 
knowledge as also wisdom [Knowledge refers to 
the understanding of subjects presented by the 
scriptures; wisdom means making them matters of 
one's own experience.] and faith. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.42 Svabhavajam brahma-karma, the natural 
duties of the Brhamanas, of the Brahmana caste; 
are samah, control of the internal organs; damah, 
control of the external organs-these bear the 
meanings as explained earlier (see 6.3, 10.4, 16.1); 
tapah, austerity-bodily austerity, as explained 
before (17.14); saucam, purity, as already explained 
(in 13.7, 16.3); ksantih, forgiveness; arjavam, 
straightforwardness, simplicity; jnanam, 
knowledge; eva ca, as also vijnanam, wisdom; 
astikyam, faith, the idea of truth [Truth of the 
scritpures, existence of God, etc. In place of asti bhavah Ast reads astika-bhavah, the feeling of 
conviction with regard to the existence of God and 
the other world. Tr.] respect for the teaching of the
scriptures. By svabhavajam (natural) is conveyed 
the very same idea as was expressed in 'classified 
according to the gunas born from Nature' (41). 
18.43 The natural duties of the Ksatriyas are 
heroism, boldness, fortitude, capability, and also 
not retreating from battle, generosity and 
lordliness. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.43 Svabhavajam, the natural; ksatra-karma, [A 
variant reading is ksatram karma.-Tr.] enjoined 
duties of the Ksatriyas, of the Ksatriya caste; are 
sauryam, heroism; tejah, boldness; dhrtih, 
fortitude, as is seen in the case of one who is not 
depressed under all circumstances, being sustained 
by doggedness; daksyam, capability engagement 
without confusion in duties which suddenly 
present them-selves; api ca, and also; apalayanam, 
not retreating; yuddhe, from battle, not fleeing 
from enemies; danam, generosity, being free in the 
distribution of gifts; isvarabhavah, lordliness, 
manifesting (exercising) rulership over those who 
have to be ruled. 
18.44 The natural duties of the Vaisyas are 
agriculture, cattle-rearing and trade. Of the Sudras, 
too, the natural duty is in the form of service. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.44 Svabyavajam, the natural; vaisya-karma, 
duties of the Vaisyas, of the Vaisya caste; are krsi gauraksyavanijyam, agriculture, cattle rearing and 
trade: Krsi is tilling of land. Orre who rears cattle 
(go) is goraksa; the abstract form of that word is 
gauraksyam, animal-husbandry. Vanijyam means 
the occupation of a trader, consisting of buying 
and selling. Sudrasya, of the Sudra; api, too; 
svabhavajam, the natural; karma, duty; is 
paricaryatmakam, in the form of service. When 
rightly pursued, the natural result of these duties 
enjoined for the castes is the attainment of heaven which act is evident from such Smrti texts as, 
'People belonging to the castes and stages of life, 
who are true to their own duties, experience after 
death the fruit of their actions. And after that, as a 
result of the remnants of their merits they are born 
in some excellent region, caste and family, with 
greater piety, longevity, learning, conduct, wealth, 
happiness and intelligence' (Ap. Dh. Su. 2.2.2.3), 
etc. And in the Puranas also it is particularly 
mentioned that poeple belonging to the (different) 
castes and stages of life come to have specific 
results in the form of different worlds. But this 
result that is going to be stated follows from a 
different cause: 
18.45 Being devoted to his own duty, man attains 
complete success. Hear that as to how one devoted 
to his own duty achieves success. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.45 Sve sve karmani abhiratah, being devoted to 
his own duty, which has different characteristics as 
stated above; narah, man, the person qualified 
therefor; labhate, attains; samsiddhim, complete 
success, characterized as the ability for 
steadfastness in Knowledge, which follows from 
the elimination of the impurities of body and mind 
as a result of fulfilling his own duty. Does the 
complete success follow merely from the fulfilment 
of one's own duty? No. How then? Srnu, hear; tat, 
that; yatha, as to how, through what means; sva-
karma-niratah, one devoted to his own duty; 
vindati, acheives; siddim, success. 
18.46 A human being achieves success by adoring 
through his own duties Him from whom is the 
origin of creatures, and by whom is all this 
pervaded. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.46 Manavah, a human being; vindati, achieves; 
siddhim, success, merely in the form of the ability 
for steadfastness in Knowledge; abhyarcya, by 
adoring, worshipping; svakarmana, with his own 
duties stated above, as allotted to each caste; tam, 
Him, God; yatah, from whom, from which God; 
comes pravrttih, origin,-or, from which internal 
Ruler comes the activities; ;bhutanam, of creatures, 
of living beings; and yena, by whom, by which 
God; is tatam, pervaded; sarvam, all; idam, this 
world. Since this is so, therefore, 
18.47 One's own duty, (though) defective, is 
superior to another's duty well performed. By 
performing a duty as dictated by one's own nature, 
one does not incur sin. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.47 Svadharmah, one's own duty; though 
vigunah, defective-the word though has to be 
supplied-; is sreyan, superior to, more 
praiseworthy than; paradharmat, another's duty; 
su-anusthitat, well performed. Kurvan, by 
performing; karma, a duty; svabhavaniyatam, as 
dictated by one's own nature-this phrase means the 
same as svabhavajam (born from Nature) which 
has been stated earlier-; na apnoti, one does not 
incur; kilbisam, sin. As poison is not harmful to a 
worm born it it, so one does not incur sin by 
performing a duty dictated by one's own nature. It 
has been siad that, as in the case of a worm born in 
poison, a person does not incur sin while 
performing his duties which have been dictated by 
his own nature; and that someone else's duty is 
fraught with fear; also that, one who does not have 
the knoweldge of the Self, (he) surely cannot 
remain even for a moment without doing work (cf.3.5). 
18.48 O son of Kunti, one should not give up the 
duty to which one is born, even though it be faulty. 
For all undertakings are surrounded with evil, as 
fire is with smoke. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.48 Kaunteya, O son of Kunti; na tyajet, one 
should not give up;-what?-the karma, duty; 
sahajam, to which one is born, which devolves 
from the very birth; api, even though; it be 
sadosam, faulty, consisting as it is of the three 
gunas. Hi, for; sarva-arambhah, all undertakings (-
whatever are begun are arambhah, i.e. 'all actions', 
according to the context-), being constituted by the 
three gunas (-here, the fact of being constituted by 
the three gunas is the cause-); are avrtah, 
surrounded; dosena, with evil; iva, as;; agnih, fire; 
is dhumena, with smoke, which comes into being 
concurrently. One does not get freed from evil by 
giving up the duty to which one is born-called 
one's own duty-, even though (he may be) fulfilling 
somebody else's duty. Another's duty, too, is 
fraught with fear. The meaning is: Since action 
cannot be totally given up by an unelightened 
person, therefore he should not relinquish it. 
Opponent: Well, is it that one should not abandon 
action because it cannot be given up completely, or 
is it because evil [Evil resulting from discarding 
daily obligatory duties.] follows from the giving up 
of the duty to which one is born? Counter objection: What follows from this? Opponent: If it 
be that the duty to which one is born should not be 
renounced because it is impossible to relinquish it 
totally, then the conclusion that can be arrived at is 
that complete renunciation (of duty) is surely 
meritorious! Counter-objection: Truly so. But, may 
it not be that total relinquishment is itself an 
impossibility? Is a person ever-changeful like the 
gunas of the Sankhyas, or is it that action itself is 
the agent, as it is in the case of the momentary five 
[Rupa (from), vedana (feeling), vijnana 
(momentary consciousness), sanjna (notion), 
samskara (mental impressions)-these have only 
momentary existence. In their case there can be no 
distinction between action and agent, simply due 
to the fact of their being momentary.] forms of 
mundane consciousness propounded by the 
Buddhists? In either case there can be no complete 
renunciation of action. Then there is also a third 
standpoint (as held by the Vaisesikas): When a 
thing acts it is active, and inactive when that very 
thing does not act. If this be the case here, it is 
possible to entirely give up actions. But the 
speciality of the third point of view is that a thing 
is not ever-changing, nor is action itself the agent. 
What then? A nonexistent action originates in an 
existing thing, and an existing action gets 
destroyed. The thing-in-itself continues to exist 
along with its power (to act), and that itself is the 
agent. This is what the followers of Kanada say. 
[Their view is that agentship consists in 'possessing 
the power to act', not in being the substratum of 
action.] What is wrong with this point of view. 
Vedantin: The defect indeed lies in this that, this 
veiw is not in accord with the Lord's view. 
Objection: How is this known? Vedantin: Since the 
Lord as said, 'Of the unreal there is no being...,' etc. 
(2.16). The view of the followers of Kanada is, 
indeed, this that the non-existent becomes existent, 
and the existent becomes nonexistent. Objection: 
What defect can there be if it be that this view, 
even though not the view of the Lord, yet conforms 
to reason? Vedantin: The answer is: This is surely 
faulty since it contradicts all valid evidence. 
Objection: How? Vedantin: As to this, if things like 
a dvyanuka (dyad of two anus, atoms) be 
absolutely nonexistent before origination, and after 
origination continue for a little while, and again 
become absolutely non-existent, then, in that acase, 
the existent which was verily nonexistent comes 
into being, [Here Ast. adds, 'sadeva asattvam 
apadyate, that which is verily existent becomes 
nonexistent'.-Tr.] a non-entity becomes an entity, 
and an entity becomes a non-entity! If this be the 
view, then the non-enity that is to take birth is 
comparable to the horns of a hare before it is born, 
and it comes into being with the help of what are 
called material (inherent), non-mateial (non inherent) and efficient causes. But it cannot be said 
that nonexistence has origination in this way, or 
that it depends on some cause, since this is not seen 
in the case of nonexistent things like horns of a 
hare, etc. If such things as pot etc. which are being 
produced be of the nature of (potentially) existing 
things, then it can be accepted that they originate 
by depending on some cause which merely 
manifests them. [According to Vedanta, before 
origination a thing, e.g. a pot, remains latent in its 
material cause, clay for instance, with its name and 
form unexpressed, and it depends on other causes 
for the manifestation of name and form.] 
Moreover, if the nonexistent becomes existent, and 
the existent becomes non-existent, then nobody 
will have any faith while dealing with any of the 
means of valid knowledge objects of such 
knowledge, because the conviction will be lacking 
that the existent is existent and the nonexistent is 
nonexistent! Further, when they speak of 
origination, they (the Viasesikas) hold that such a 
thing as a dvyanuka (dyad) comes to have 
relationship with its own (material) causes (the two 
atoms) and existence, and that it is nonexistent 
before origination; but later on, depending on the 
operation of its own causes, it becomes connected 
with its own causes, viz the atoms, as also with 
existence, through the inherent (or inseparable) 
relationship called samavaya. After becoming 
connected, it becomes an existent thing by its 
inherent relationship with its causes. [The effect 
(dyad) has inherent relationship with existence 
after its material causes (the two atoms) come into 
association.] It has to be stated in this regard as to 
how the nonexistent can have an existent as its 
cuase, or have relationship with anything. For 
nobody can establish through any valid means of 
knowledge that a son of a barren woman can have 
any existence or relationship or cause. Vaisesika: Is 
it not that relationship of a non-existent thing is not 
at all established by the Vaisesikas? Indeed, what is 
said by them is that only existent entities like 
dvyanuka etc. have the relationship in the form of 
samavaya with their own causes. Vedantin: No, for 
it is not admitted (by them) that anything has 
existence before the (samavaya) relationship 
(occurs). It is surely not held by the Vaisesikas that 
a pot etc. have any existence before the potter, (his) 
stick, wheel, etc. start functioning. Nor do they 
admit that clay itself takes the shape of a pot etc. 
As a result, it has to be admitted (by them) as the 
last aternative that nonexistence itself has some 
relationship! Vaisesika: Well, it is not contradictory 
even for a nonexistent thing to have the 
relationship in the form of inherence. Vedantin: 
No, because this is not seen in the case of a son of a 
barren woman etc. If the antecedent nonexistence 
(prag-abhava) of the pot etc. alone comes into a 
relationship with its own (material) cause, but not 
so the nonexistence of the son of a barren woman 
etc. though as nonexistence both are the same, then 
the distinction between the (two) nonexistences has 
to be explained. Through such descriptions ( of 
abhava, nonexistence) as nonexistence of one, 
nonexistence of two, nonexistence of all, 
antecedent nonexistence, nonexistence after 
destruction, mutual nonexistence and absolute 
non-existence, nobody can show any distinction (as 
regards nonexistence itself)! There being no 
distinction, (therefore, to say that:) 'it is only the 
"antecedent nonexistence" of the pot which takes 
the form of the pot through the (action of) the 
potter and others, and comes into a relationship 
with the existing pot-halves which are its own 
(material) causes and becomes fit for all empirical 
processes [Such as production, destruction, etc.] 
but the "nonexistence after destruction" of that very 
pot does not do so, though it, too, is nonexistence. 
Hence, the "nonexistence after destruction", etc. 
[Etc. stands for 'mutual nonexistence (anyonya abhava)' and 'absolute nonexistence (atyanta abhava)'.] are not fit for any empirical processes, 
whereas only the "antecedent nonexistence" of 
things called dvyanuka etc. is fit for such empirical 
processes as origination etc.'-all this is 
incongruous, since as nonexistence it is 
indistinguishable, as are 'absolute nonexistence' 
and 'nonexistence after destruction'. Vaisesika: 
Well, it is not at all said by us that the 'antecedent 
nonexistence' becomes existent. Vedantin: In that 
case, the existent itself becomes existent , as for 
instance, a pot's becoming a pot, or a cloth's 
becoming a cloth. This, too, like nonexistence 
becoming existent, goes against valid evidence. 
Even the theory of transformation held by the 
Sankhyas does not differ from the standpoint of the 
Vaisesikas, since they believe in the origination of 
some new attribute [i.e. in the origination of a 
transformation that did not exist before.] and its 
destruction. Even if manifestation and 
disappearance of anything be accepted, yet there 
will be contradiction with valid means of 
knowledge as before in the explanation of existence 
or nonexistence of manifestation and 
disappearance. Hereby is also refuted the idea that 
origination etc. (of an effect) are merely particular 
states of its cuase. As thelast alternative, it is only 
the one entity called Existence that is imagined 
variously through ignorance to be possessed of the 
states of origination, destruction, etc. like an actor 
(on a stage). This veiw of the Lord has been stated 
in the verse, 'Of the unreal there is no being...' 
(2.16). For, the idea of existence is constant, while 
the others are inconstant. Objection: If the Self be 
immutable, then how does the 'renunciation of all 
actions' become illogical? Vedantin: If the adjuncts 
(i.e. body and organs) be real or imagined through 
ignorance, in either case, action, which is their 
attribute, is surely superimposed on the Self 
through ignorance. From this point of view it has 
been said that an unenlightened person is 
incapable of totally renouncing actions even for a 
moment (cf. 3.5). The enlightened person, on the 
other hand, can indeed totally renounce actions 
when ignorance has been dispelled through 
Illumination; for it is illogical that there can (then) 
remain any trace of what has been superimposed 
through ignorance. Indeed, no trace remains of the 
two moons, etc. superimposed by the vision 
affected by (the disease called) Timira when the 
desease is cured. This being so, the utterance, 
'having given up all actions mentally' (5.13), etc. as 
also, 'Being devoted to his own duty' (45) and 'A 
human being achieves 'success by adoring Him 
through his own duties (46), becomes justifiable. 
What was verily spoken of as the success arising 
from Karma (-yoga), characterized as the fitness for 
steadfastness in Knowledge,-the fruit of that 
(fitness), characterized as 'steadfastness in 
Knowledge' consisting in the perfection in the form 
of the state of one (i.e. a monk) free from duties, 
has to be stated. Hence the (following) verse is 
begun: 
18.49 He whose intellect remains unattached to 
everything, who has conquered his internal organs 
and is desireless, attains through monasticism the 
supreme perfection consisting in the state of one 
free from duties. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.49 Asakta-buddhih, he whose intellect, the 
internal organ, remains unattached; sarvatra, to 
everything, with regard to son, wife and others 
who are the cuases of attachment; jitatma, who has 
conquered his internal organs; and vigata-sprhah, 
who is desireless, whose thirst for his body, life 
and objects of enjoyment have been eradicated;-he 
who is such a knower of the Self, adhigaccahti, 
attains; sannyasena, through monasticism, through 
perfect knowledge or through renunciation of all 
actions preceded by this knowledge; the paramam, 
supreme, most excellent; naiskarmya-siddhim, 
perfection consisting in the state of one free from 
duties. One is said to be free from duties from 
whom duties have daparted as a result of realizing 
that the actionless Brahman is his Self; his state is 
naiskarmyam. That siddhi (perfection) which is 
this naiskarmya is naiskarmya-siddhi. Or, this 
phrase means 'achievement of naiskarmya', i.e., 
achievement of the state of remaining established 
in one's own real nature as the actionless Self which is different from the success arising from 
Karma (-yoga), and is of the form of being 
established in the state of immediate Liberation. 
Accordingly has it been said, '...having given up all 
actions mentally,...without doing or causing 
(others) to do anything at all' (5.13). The stages 
through which one who has attained success which has the aforesaid characteristics and which 
arises from the performance of one's own duties 
mentioned earlier as worship of God-, and in 
whom has arisen discriminative knowledge, 
achieves perfection-in the form of exclusive 
adherence to Knowledge of the Self and consisting 
in the state of one free from duties-have to be 
stated. With this is view the Lord says: 
18.50 Understand for certain from Me, in brief 
indeed, O son of Kunti, that process by which one 
who has achieved success attains Brahman, which 
is the supreme consummation of Knowledge. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.50 Nibodha, understand for certain; me, from 
Me, from My utterance-. Is it elaborately? The Lord 
says, no, samasena, in brief; eva, indeed, O son of 
Kunti, how siddhim praptah, one who has 
achieved success, one who, by worshipping God 
through one's duties, has achieved success in the 
form of fitness of the body and organs for 
steadfastness in Knowledge, which comes from His 
grace; (-the reiteration of the phrase siddhim 
praptah is meant for introducing what follows; 
what is that succeeding subject for which this 
reiteration stands is being answered:) yatha tatha, 
that process by which, that process in the form of 
steadfastness in Knowledge, by which that process 
of acquiring steadfastness in Knowledge by which; 
apnoti, attains; brahma, Brahman, th supreme Self-. 
In order to point out-as 'It is this'-the realization of 
Brahman which was promised in, 'that process by 
which one...attains Brahman,' the Lord says; ya, 
which; is the para, supreme; nistha, consummation, 
i.e. the supreme culmination; jnanasya, of 
Knowledge. Of what? Of the knowledge of 
Brahman. Of what kind is it? It is of the same kind 
as the realization of the Self. Of what kind is that? 
As is the Self. Of what nature is It? As has been 
described by the Lord and the Upanisadic texts, 
and established through reason. Objection: Is it not 
that knowledge takes the form of its object? But it 
is not admitted anywhere that the Self is an object, 
or even that It has form. Pseudo-Vedantin: Is it not 
heard of in such texts as, 'radiant like the sun' (Sv.3.8), 
'Of the nature of effulgence' (Ch. 3.14.2) and 
'Self-effulgent' (Br. 4.3.9), that the Self has form? 
Objection: No, because those sentences are meant 
for refuting the idea that the Self is of the nature of 
darkness. When the Self is denied of possessing 
forms of substance, quality, etc., the contingency 
arises of the Self's being of the nature of darkness. 
The sentences, 'radiant like the sun,' etc. are meant 
for rebuting this. And this follows from the specific 
denial of from by saying, 'Formless' (Ka. 1.3.15), 
and from such texts as, 'His form does not exist 
within the range of vision; nobody sees Him with 
the eye' (Ka. 2.3.9: Sv. 4.20), 'soundless, touchless' 
(ka. 1.3.15), etc. which show that the Self is not an 
object of perception. Therefore it remains 
unproved that there can be any knowledge which 
takes the form of the Self. How, then, can there be 
the knowledge of the Self? For, all knowledge that 
there can be with regard to objects assumes their 
respective forms. And it has been said that the Self 
has no form. Moreover, if both knowledge and the 
Self be formless, then how can there be the 
consummation [Firmness in Self-realization.] of the 
(repeated) contemplation on that (knowledge of 
the Self)? Vedantin: No. Since it can be established 
that the Self is supremely taintless, pure and subtle, 
and it can also be established that the intellect can 
have taintlessness etc. like the Self, therefore it 
stands to reason that the intellect can take a form 
resembling the consciousness of the Self. The mind 
becomes impressed with the semblance of the 
intellect; the organs become impressed with the 
semblance of the mind; and the body becomes 
impressed with the semblance of hte organs. Hence 
it is that the idea of the body itself being the Self is 
held by ordinary people. The Lokayatikas 
(materialists), who hold that the body is identical 
with consciousness, say that a person is a body 
endowed with consciousness; so also there are 
others who say that the organs are identical with 
consciousness; there are others who say that the 
mind is identical with consciousness, and still 
others who say that the intellect is identical with 
consciousness. Some accept as the Self the 
Unmanifest [The inmost Ruler (antaryamin), 
possessing a semblance of Consciousness.], called 
the Undifferentiated, which is more internal than 
that (intellect) and is within the domain of 
(primordial) ignorance. Indeed, in every case, 
beginning from the intellect to the body, the cause 
of mis-conceived Selfhood is the semblance of the 
Consciousness that is the Self. Hence, knowledge 
about the Self is not a subject for injunction. What 
then? Only the eradication of the superimposition 
of name, form, etc., which are not the Self, is what 
has to be undertaken, but not the knowledge of the 
Self that is Consciousness. For it is the Self which is 
experienced as possessed of the forms of all the 
various objects that are superimposed (on It) 
through ignorance. It is evidently because of this 
that the Buddhists who uphold the view of 
(momentary) consciousness have concluded that 
there is no substance at all apart from (momentary) 
consciousness, and that it is not in need of any 
other valid proof since they hold that it is self cognized. Therefore, what is to be undertaken is 
only the elimination of the superimposition on 
Brahman through ignorance, but no effort is 
needed for knowing Brahman (Consciousness), for 
It is quite self-evident! It is because the intellect is 
distracted by particular appearances of name and 
form imagined through ignorance that Brahman, 
even though self-evident, easily realizable, nearer 
than all else and identical with oneself, appears to 
be concealed, difficult to realize, very far and 
different, But to those whose intellect has become 
free from external appearances and who have 
obtained the grace of a teacher and serenity of 
mind, there is nothing more blissful, manifest, well 
known, easily realized and nearer to oneself than 
this Self. And thus it has been declared, 'directly 
realizable, righteous,' etc. (9.2). However, some 
wiseacres assert that the intellect cannot 
comprehend the entity called the Self since It is 
formless; hence, complete steadfastness in 
Knowledge is impossible. This is truly so for those 
who have not associated with a traditional line of 
teachers; who have not heard the Upanisads; 
whose intellects are too much engrossed with 
external objects; and who have not applied 
themselves diligently to the perfect means of 
knowledge. For those, on the other hand, who are 
the opposite of these, it is absolutely impossible to 
have the idea of reality with regard to empirical 
objects, which are within the realm of duality 
involving the knower and the known, because in 
their case there is no perception of any other thing 
apart from the Consciousness that is the Self. We 
have already said how this is certainly so and not 
otherwise. It has been stated by the Lord also, 'That 
during which creatures keep awake, it is night to 
the seeing sage' (2.69). Therefore, the cessation of 
the perception of differences in the form of external 
things is alone the cause of resting in the reality of 
the Self. For, that which is called the Self is never 
an object which is not well known, attainable, 
rejectable or acceptable to anyone at any time. 
Were that Self to be indeed not self-evident, all 
activities would become meaningless. [According 
to Ast. the latter portion of this sentence is: 
svarthah sarvah pravrttayah vyarthah prasajyeran, 
all activities meant for one's own benefit would 
become meaningless.-Tr.]. For it cannot be 
imagined that they could be undertaken for 
unconscious objects like the body etc. Besides, it 
cannot be that pleasure is for pleasure's sake, or 
that sorrow is for sorrow's sake. Moreover, all 
empirical dealings are meant for culminating in the 
realization of the Self. [According to B.S. 3.4.26, 'On 
the strength of the Upanisadic sanction of sacrifices 
etc. all religious activities as well are necessary...', 
sacrifices etc. are meant for leading to the 
realization of the Self, without which they would 
become meaningless.] Therefore, just as for 
knowing one's own body there is no need of any 
other (external) means of knowledge so also there 
is no need of any other means of knowledge, for 
the realization of the Self which is innermost (in 
relation to the body etc.). Hence it is established 
that steadfastness in the knowledge of the Self is a 
fact very well known to the discriminating people. 
Even to those who hold that knowledge is formless 
and not cognized by direct perception, cognition of 
an object is dependent on knowledge. Hence it has 
to be admitted that knowledge is as immediate as 
pleasure etc. And this follows also from the 
impossibility of a desire to know (knowledge). Had 
knowledge been not self-evident, it could have 
been sought for like any object of knowledge. And 
in that case, as [This is Ast.'s reading; others read 
tatha.-Tr.] a knower seeks to perceive through 
knowledge such objects of knowledge as pot etc., 
similarly the knower would have sought to 
perceive knowledge through another knowledge! 
But this is not the case. Therefore knowledge is 
quite self-revealing, and for the very same reason 
the knower also is self-revealed. Hence, effort is 
not needed for knowledge, but only for the 
removal of the notion of what is not-Self. [In place 
of anatma-buddhi-nivrttau, Ast. has 'anatmani 
atma-buddhi-nivrttau, for the termination of 
thinking what is not the Self as the Self'.-Tr.] 
Consequently, steadfastness in Knowledge is easy 
of accomplishment. It is being stated how this 
supreme consummation of Knowledge is to be 
attained: 
18.51 Being endowed with a pure intellect, and 
controlling oneself with fortitude, rejecting the 
objects-beginning from sound [Sound, touch, form 
and colour, taste and smell.-Tr.], and eliminating 
attachment and hatred; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.51 Yuktah, being endowed; buddhya, with an 
intellect-which is identical with the faculty of 
determination; visuddhaya, pure, free from maya 
(delusion); and niyamya, controlling, subduing; 
atmanam, oneself, the aggregate of body and 
organs; dhrtya, with fortitude, with steadlines; 
tyaktva, rejecting; visayan, the objects; sabdadin, 
beginning from sound -from the context it follows 
that 'rejecting the objects' means rejecting all things 
which are meant for pleasure and are in excess of 
those meant only for the mere maintenance of the 
body; and vyudasya, eliminating; raga-dvesau, 
attachment and hatred with regard to things which 
come to hand for the maintenance of the body-. 
Therefore, 
18.52 One who resorts to solitude, eats sparingly, 
has speech, body and mind under control, to 
whom meditation and concentration are ever the 
highest (duty), and who is possessed of dispassion; 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.52 Vivikta-sevi, one who resorts to solitude, is 
habituated to repairing into such solitary places as 
a forest, bank of a river, mountain caves, etc.; 
laghuasi, eats sparingly, is habituated to eating a 
little-repairing to solitary places and eating 
sparingly are nentioned here since they are the 
causes of tranquillity of mind through the 
elimination of defects like sleep etc.-; the person 
steadfast in Knowledge, yata-vak-kaya-manasah, 
who has speech, body and mind under control. 
Having all his organs withdrawn thus, dhyana yoga-parah nityam, one to whom meditation and 
concentration are ever the highest (duty)-
meditation is thinking of the real nature of the Self, 
and concentration is making the mind one-pointed 
with regard to the Self itself; one to whom these 
meditation and concentration are the highest 
(duty) is dhyana-yoga-parah-. Nityam, (ever) is 
used to indicate the absence of other duties like 
repetition of mantra [A formula of prayer sacred to 
any deity.-V.S.A.] etc. Samupasritah, one who is 
fully possessed, i.e. ever possessed; of vairagyam, 
dispassion, absence of longing for objects seen or 
unseen-. Further, 
18.53 (That person,) having discarded egotism, 
force, pride, desire, anger and superfluous 
possessions, free from the idea of possession, and 
serene, is fit for becoming Brahman. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.53 (That person) vimucya, having discarded; 
ahan-karam, egotism, thinking of the body, organs, 
etc. as the ego; balam, force-which is associated 
with desire and attachment; not the other kind of 
strength consisting in the fitness of the body etc., 
becuase being natural it cannot be descarded-; 
darpam, pride, which follows elation and leads to 
transgresson of righteousness-for the Smrti says, 
'An elated person becomes proud; a proud man 
transgresses righteousness' (Ap. Dh. Su. 1.13.4); 
kamam, desire; krodham, anger, aversion; 
parigraham, superfluous possessions-even after 
removing the defects in the organs and the mind, 
there arises the possibility of acceptance of gifts 
either for the maintenance of the body or for 
righteous duties; discarding them as well, i.e. 
becoming a mendicant of the param-hamsa class; 
nirmamah, free from the idea of possession, 
becoming devoid of the idea of 'me' and 'mine' 
even with regard to so much as one's body and life; 
and for the very same reason, santah, serene, 
withdrawn; the monk who is effortless and 
steadfast in Knowledge, kalpate, becomes fit; 
brahma-bhuyaya, for becoming Brahman. 
18.54 One who has become Brahman and has 
attained the blissful Self does not grieve or desire. 
Becoming the same towards all beings, he attains 
supreme devotion to Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.54 Brahma-bhutah, one who has become 
Brahman, attained Brahman through the above 
process; and prasanna-atma, [Prasada means the 
manifestation of the supreme Bliss of the Self as a 
result of the total cessation of all evils. Prasanna atma is one who has attained this in the present life 
itself.] has attained the blissful Self, the indwelling 
Self; na, does not; socati, grieve-does not lament for 
the loss of something or the lack of some quality in 
oneself; nor kanksati, desire. By saying 'he does not 
grieve nor desire', this nature of one who has 
attained Brahman is being restated. For it does not 
stand to reason that in the case of a knower of 
Brahman there can be any hankering for something 
unattained. Or, (in place of kanksati) teh reading 
may be na hrsyati, does not become elated. 
Becoming samah, the same; sarvesu bhutesu, 
towards all being-i.e., he verily judges what is 
happiness and sorrow in all beings by the same
standard as he would apply to himself (cf. 6.32); 
but the meaning is not 'seeing the Self alike in all 
beings', for this will be spoken of in (the next 
verse), 'Through devotion he knows Me'-; he, the 
one who is of this kind and steadfast in 
Knowledge, labhate, attains; param, supreme; 
madbhaktim, devotion to Me, to the supreme Lord; 
(he attains) devotion which is described as 
Knowledge, as the 'fourth' in, '...four classes of 
people...adore Me' (7.16). Then, 
18.55 Through devotion he knows Me in reality, as 
to what and who I am. Then, having known Me in 
truth, he enters (into Me) immediately after that 
(Knowledge). 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.55 Bhaktya, through devotion, through that 
devotion described as Knowledge; abhijanati, he 
knows; mam, Me; tattvatah, in reality; as to yavan, 
what I am, with the extensive differences created 
by limiting adjuncts; and yah asmi, who I am when 
all distinctions create by the limiting adjuncts are 
destroyed-Me who am the supreme Person 
comparable to space [In points of all-pervasiveness 
and non-attachment.] and one-without-a-second, 
absolute, homogeneous Consciousness, birthless, 
ageless, immortal, fearless and deathless. Tatah, 
then; jnatva, having known; mam, Me, thus; 
tattvatah, in truth; visate, he enters into Me, 
Myself; tadanantaram, immediately after that 
(Knowledge). Here, by saing, 'having known, he 
enters without delay', it is not meant that the acts 
of 'knowing' and 'entering immediately after' are 
different. What then? What is meant is the absolute 
Knowledge itself that has to no other result, [In 
place of phalantarabhava-jnana-matram eva, Ast. 
reads 'phalantarbhavat jnanamatram eva, absolute 
Knowledge itself, since there is no other result'.-
Tr.] for it has been said, 'And...understand Me to be 
the "Knower of the field", (13.2). Opponent: Has it 
not been contradictory to say, he knows Me 
through that which is the supreme steadliness 
(nistha) in Knowledge? Vedantin: If it be asked, 
How it is contradictory? Opponent: The answer is: 
Whenever any Knowledge of something arises in a 
knower, at that very moment the knower knows 
that object. Hence, he does not depend on 
steadfastness in Knowledge which consists in the 
repetition of the act of knowing. And therefore, it is 
contradictory to say one knows not through 
knowledge, but through steadfastness in 
knowledge which is a repetition of the act of 
knowing. Vedantin: There is no such fault, since 
the culmination of Knowledge-which (Knowledge) 
is associated with the causes of its unfoldment and 
maturity, and which has nothing to contradict it- in 
the conviction that one's own Self has been realized 
is what is referred to by the word nistha 
(consummation): When knowledge-which 
concerns the identity of the 'Knower of the field' 
and the supreme Self, and which remains 
associated with the renunciation of all actions that 
arise from the perception of the distinction among 
their accessories such as agent etc., and which 
unfolds from the instruction of the scriptures and 
teachers, depending on purity of the intellect etc. 
and humility etc. which are the auxiliary cuases of 
the origin and maturity of Knowledge-continues in 
the form of the conviction that one's own Self has 
been realized, then that continuance is called the 
supreme steadfastness (nistha) in Knowledge. This 
steadfastness in Knowledge that is such has been 
spoken of as the highest, the fourth kind of 
devotion in relation to the three other devotions 
viz of the afflicted, etc. (cf. 7.16). Through that 
highest devotion one realizes the Lord in truth. 
Immediately after that the idea of difference 
between the Lord and the Knower of the field 
vanishes totally. There-fore the statement, 'one 
knows Me through devotion in the form of 
steadfastness in Knowledge', is not contradictory. 
And, in this sense, all the scriptures-consisting of 
Vedanta (Upanisads etc.), History, Mythology and 
Smrtis-, as for instance, 'Knowing (this very Self 
the Brahmanas) renounce...and lead a mendicant's 
life' (Br. 3.5.1), 'Therefore they speak of 
monasticism as excellent among these austerities' 
(Ma. Na. 24.1), 'Monasticism verily became 
supreme' (ibid. 21.2), which enjoin renunciation 
become meaningful. Thus, monasticism means 
renunciation of rites and duties. There are also the 
texts, 'Having renounced the Vedas as well as this 
world and the next' (Ap. Dh. Su. 2.9.13), and 'Give 
up religion and irreligion' (Mbh. Sa. 329.40; 331.44), 
etc. And here (in the Gita) also various relevant) 
passages have been pointed out. In is not porper 
that those texts should be meaningless. Nor are 
they merely eulogistic, since they occur in their 
own contexts. Besides, Liberation consists in being 
established in the changeless real nature of the 
indwelling Self. Indeed, it is not possible that one 
who wants to go to the eastern sea and the other 
who wants to go in the opposite direction to the 
western sea can have the same course! And 
steadfastness in Knowledg consists in being totally 
absorbed in maintaining a current of thought with 
regard to the indwelling Self. And that is opposed 
to coexistence with duties, like going to the 
western sea. It has been the conclusion of those 
versed in the valid means of knowledge that the 
difference between them is as wide as that between 
a mountain and a mustard seed! Therefore it is 
established that one should have recourse to 
steadfastness in Knowledge only, by relinquishing 
all rites and duties. The fruit of the attainment of 
success from the Yoga of Devotion consisting in 
worshiping the Lord with one's own actions is the 
ability to remain steadfast in Knowledge, from 
which, follows stead-fastness in Knowledge, 
culminating in the result, Liberation. That Yoga of 
Devotion to the Lord is now being praised in this 
concluding section dealing with the purport of the 
Scripture, with a veiw to generating a firm 
conviction with regard to it (the purport of the 
Scripture): 
18.56 Ever engaging even in all actions, one to 
whom I am the refuge, attains the eternal, 
immutable State through My grace. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.56 Sada, ever; kurvanah api, engaging even in; 
sarva-karmani, all actions, even the prohibited 
ones; madvyapasrayah, one to whom I am the 
refuge, to whom I, Vasudeva the Lord, am the 
refuge, i.e. one who has totally surrendered himself 
to Me; even he, apnoti, attains; the sasvatam, 
eternal; avyayam, immutable; padam, State of 
Visnu; mat-prasadat, through My, i.e. God's, grace. 
Since this is so, therefore,
18.57 Mentally surrendering all actions to Me and 
accepting Me as the supreme, have your mind ever 
fixed on Me by resorting to the concentration of 
your intellect. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.57 Cetasa, mentally, with a discriminating 
intellect; sannyasya, surrendering; sarva-karmani, 
all actions meant for seen or unseen results; mayi, 
to Me, to God, in the manner described in, 
'Whatever you do, whatever you eat' (9.27); and 
matparah, accepting Me as the supreme-you to 
whom I, Vasudeva, am the supreme, are matparah; 
becoming so; satatam, ever; maccittah bhava, have 
your kind fixed only on Me; upasritya, by 
resorting-resorting implies not taking recourse to 
anything else-; buddhi-yogam, to the concentration 
of your intellect. Having the intellect (buddhi) 
concentrated on Me is buddhi-yoga. 
18.58 Having your mind fixed on Me, you will 
cross over all difficulties through My grace. If, on 
the other hand, you do not listen out of egotism, 
you will get destroyed. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.58 Maccittah, having your mind fixed on Me; 
tarisyasi, you will cross over; sarva-durgani, 
alldifficulties, all cuases of transmigration which 
are difficult to overcome; mat-prasadat, through 
My grace. Atha cet, if, on the other hand; tvam, 
you; na srosyasi, will not listen to, will not accept, 
My words; ahankarat, out of egotism, thinking 'I 
am learned'; then vinanksyasi, you will get 
destroyed, will court ruin. And this should not be 
thought of by you-'I am independent. Why should 
I follow another's bidding?' 
18.59 That you think 'I shall not fight', by relying 
on egotism,-vain is this determination of yours. 
(Your) nature impel you! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.59 Yat, that; manyase, you think, resolve; this-
'na yotsye, I shall not fight'; asritya, by relying; on 
ahankaram, egotism, mithya, vain; is esah, this; 
vyava-sayah, determination; te, of yours; because 
prakrtih, nature, your own nature of a Ksatriya; 
niyoksyati, will impell; ;tvam, you! 
18.60 Being bound by your own duty born of 
nature, O son of Kunti, you, being helpless, will 
verily do that which you do not wish to do owing 
to indiscrimination. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.60 And because of nibaddhah, being securely 
bound; svena, by your own; karmana, duty; 
svabhavajena, born of nature [Svabhava means 
those tendencies which are created by good bad 
actions performed in previous births, and which 
become the cause of performance of duties, 
renunciation, experience of happiness, sorrow, etc. 
in the present birth.-S.]-herosim etc. as stated (in 
43); O son of Kunti, you avasah, being helpless, 
under another's control; karisyasi api, will verily 
do; tat, that duty; yat, which duty; you na, do not; 
icchasi, wish; kartum, to do; mohat, owing to 
indiscrimination. For, 
18.61 O Arjuna, the Lord resides in the region of 
the heart of all creatures, revolving through Maya 
all the creatures (as though) mounted on a 
machine! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.61 Arjuna, O Arjuna-one whose self is naturally 
white (pure), i.e. one possessing a pure internal 
organ. This follows from the Vedic text, 'The day is 
dark and the day is arjuna (white) (Rg. 6.9.1). 
Isvarah, the Lord , Narayana the Ruler; tisthati, 
resides, remains seated; hrd-dese, in the region of 
the heart; sarva-bhutanam, of all creatures, of all 
living beings. How does He reside? In answer the 
Lord says: bhramayan, revolving; mayaya, through 
Maya, through delusion; sarva-bhutani, all the 
creatures; as though yantra-arudhani, mounted on 
a machine-like man' etc., made of wood, mounted 
on a machine. The word iva (as though) has to be 
thus understood here. Bhramayan, revolving, is to 
be connected with tisthati, resides (conveying the 
idea, 'resides...while revolving'). 
18.62 Take refuge in Him alone with your whole 
being, O scion of the Bharata dynasty. Through His 
grace you will attain the supreme Peace and the 
eternal Abode. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.62 Gaccha saranam, take refuge; tam eva, in 
Him, the Lord alone; sarva-bhavena, with your 
whole being, for getting rid of your mundane 
sufferings, O scion of the Bharata dynasty. Tat prasadat, through His grace, through God's grace; 
prapsyasi, you will attain; param, the supreme; 
santim, Peace, the highest Tranquillity; and the 
sasvatam, eternal; sthanam, Abode, the supreme 
State of Mine who am Visnu. 
18.63 To you has been imparted by Me this 
knowledge [Derived in the instrumental sense of 
'means of knowledge'; i.e. the scripture Gita.] 
which is moe secret than any secret. Pondering 
over this as a whole, do as you like. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.63 Te, to you; akhyatam, has been imparted, 
spoken of; maya, by Me who am the omniscient 
God; iti, this; jnanam, knowledge; which is 
guhyataram, more secret; guhyat, than any secret i.e. it is extremely profound, mystical. Vimrsya, 
pondering over, contemplating on; etat, this, the 
Scripture as imparted; asesena, as a whole, and 
also on all the subjects dealt with; kuru, do; yatha 
icchasi tatha, as you like. 'Once again, hear what is 
beng said by Me:' 
18.64 Listen again to My highest utterance which is 
the profoundest of all. Since you are ever dear to 
Me, therefore I shall speak what is beneficial to 
you. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.64 Srnu, listen; bhuyah, again; to me, My; 
paramam, highest; vacah, utternace; which is 
sarva-guhyatamam, profundest of all, most secret 
of all secrets, though it has been repeatedly stated. 
Neither from fear nor even for the sake of money 
am I speaking! What then? Iti, since, considering 
that; asi, you are; drdham, ever, unwaveringly; 
istah, dear; me, to Me; tatah, therefore, for that 
reason; vaksyami, I shall speak; what is hitam, 
beneficial; te, to you, what is the highest means of 
attaining Knowledge. That is indeed the most 
beneficial of all beneficial things. 'What is that (You 
are going to tell me)?' In answer the Lord says: 
18.65 Have your mind fixed on Me, be My devotee, 
be a sacrificer to Me and bow down to Me. (Thus) 
you will come to Me alone. (This) truth do I 
pormise to you. (For) you are dear to Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.65 Bhava manmana, have your mind fixed on 
Me; be mad-bhaktah, My devotee; be a 
madyaji,sacrificer to Me, be engaged in sacrifices to 
Me; namaskuru, bow down; mam, to Me. Offer 
ever your salutations to Me alone. Continuing thus 
in them, by surrendering all ends, means and 
needs to Vasudeva only, esyasi, you will come; 
mam, to Me; eva, alone. (This) satyam, truth: do I 
pratijane, promise; te, to you, i.e. in this matter I 
make this true promise. For, asi, you are; priyah, 
dear; me, to Me. The idea conveyed by the passage 
is: Having thus understood that the Lord is true in 
His pormise, and knowing for certain that 
liberation is the unfailing result of devotion to the 
Lord, one should have dedication to God as his 
only supreme goal. Having summed up surrender 
to God as the highest secret of steadiness in Karma yoga, there-after, with the idea that complete 
realization, which is the fruit of adherence to 
Karma-yoga and which has been enjoined in all the 
Upanisads, has to be spoken about, the Lord says: 
18.66 Abandoning all forms of rites and duties, 
take refuge in Me alone. I sahll free you from all 
sins. (Therefore) do not grieve. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.66 Sarva-dharman, all forms of rites and duties: 
Here the word dharma (righteousness) includes 
adharma (unrighteousness) as well; for, what is 
intended is total renunciation of all actions, as is 
enjoined in Vedic and Smrti texts like, 'One who 
has not desisted from bad actions' (Ka. 1.2.24), 
'Give up religions and irreligion' (Mbh. Sa. 329.40), 
etc. Parityajya, abandoning all rites and duties; 
[Being a Ksatriya, Arjuna is not qualified for 
steadfastness in Knowledge through monasticism 
in the primary sense. Still, the Gita being meant for 
mankind as a whole, monasticism is spoken of here 
by accepting Arjuna as a representative man.] 
saranam vraja, take refuge; mam ekam, in Me 
alone, the Self of all, the same in all, existing in all 
beings, the Lord, the Imperishable, free from being 
in the womb, birth, old age and death-by knowing 
that I am verily so. That is, know it for certain that 
there is nothing besides Me. By revealing My real 
nature, aham, I; moksayisyami, shall free; tva, you, 
who have this certitude of understanding; sarva papebhyah, from all sins, from all bondages in the 
form of righteousness and unrighteousness. It has 
also been stated, 'I, residing in their hearts, destroy 
the dark-ness born of ignorance with the luminous 
lamp of Knowledge' (10.11). Therefore, ma, do not; 
sucah, grieve, i.e. do not sorrow. In this scripture, 
the Gita, has knowledge been established as the 
supreme means to Liberation, or is it action, or 
both? Why does the doubt arise? (Because) the 
passages like, '...by realizing which one attains 
Immortality' (13.12), 'Then, having known Me in 
truth, he enters (into Me) immediately after that 
(Knowledge)' (55), etc. point to the attainment of 
Liberation through Knowledge alone. Texts like, 
'Your right is for action alone' (2.47), '(you 
undertake) action itself (4.15), etc. show that 
actions have to be under-taken as a matter of 
compulsory duty. Since both Knowledge and 
action are thus enjoined as duties, therefore the 
doubt may arise that they, in combination as well, 
may become the cause of Liberation. Objection: 
What, again, would be the result of this inquiry? 
Vedantin: Well, the resut will verily be this: The 
ascertainment of one of these as the cuase of the 
highest good. Hence this has to be investigated 
more extensively. Knowledge of the Self, however, 
is exclusively the cause of the highest good; for, 
through the removal of the idea of differences, it 
culminates in the result that is Liberation. The idea 
of distinction among action, agent and result is 
ever active with regard to the Self because of 
ignorance. This ignorance in the form, 'My work; I 
am the agent; I shall do this work for that resut', 
has been at work from time without beginning. 
The dispeller of this ignorance is this Knowledge 
regarding the Self-in the form, 'I am the absolute, 
non agent, free from action and result; there is 
none else other than myself because, when it 
(Knowledge) arises it despels the idea of 
differences which is the cause of engagement in 
action. The word 'however' above is used for ruling 
out the other two alternatives. This refutes the two 
other alternative views by showing that the highest 
good cannot be attained through mere actions, nor 
by a combination of Knowledge and action. 
Besides, since Liberation is not a product, therefore 
it is illogical that it should have action as its means. 
Indeed, an eternal entity cannot be produced by 
either action of Knowledge. Objection: In that case, 
ever exclusive Knowledge is purposeless. 
Vedantin: No, since Knowledge, being the 
destroyer of ignorance, culminates in Liberation 
which is directly experienced result. The fact that 
Knowledge, which removes the darkness of 
ignorance, culminates in Liberation as its result is 
directly perceived in the same way as is the result 
of the light of a lamp which removes ignorance the 
form of sanke etc. and darkness from objects such 
as rope etc. Indeed, the result of light amounts to 
the mere (awareness of the) rope, free from the 
wrong notions of snake etc. So is the case with 
Knowledge. As in the case of the acts like 'cutting 
down', 'producing fire by friction' etc., in which 
accessories such as the agent and others operate, 
and which have perceivable results, there is no 
possiblity of (the agent etc.) engaging in any other 
activity giving some other result apart from 
'splitting into two', 'seeing (or lighting of) fire' etc, 
similarly, in the case of the agent and the other 
factors engaged in the 'act' of steadfastness in 
Knowledge which has a tangible result, there is no 
possibility of (their) engagement in any other 
action which has a result different from that in the 
form of the sole existence of the Self. Hence, 
steadfastness in Knowledge combined with action 
is not logical. Objection: May it not be argued that 
this is possible like the acts of eating and Agnihotra 
sacrifice etc.? [As such a common action as eating 
can go hand in hand with such Vedic rites as the 
Agnihotra-sacrifice, so, actions can be combined 
with Knowledge.] Vedantin: No, since it is 
unreasonable that, when Knowledge which resutls 
in Liberation is attained, there can remain a 
hankering for results of actions. Just as there is no 
desire for an action or its result [Action, i.e. digging 
etc.; result, i.e. bathing etc.] in connection with a 
well, pond, etc. when there is a flood all around, 
similarly when Knowledge which has Liberation 
for its result is attained there can be no possibility 
of hankering for any other result or any action 
which leads to it. Indeed, when somebody is 
engaged in actions aimed at winning a kingdom, 
there can be no possibility of his engaging in any 
activity for securing a piece of land, or having a 
longing for it! Hence, action does not constitute the 
means to the highest good. Nor do Knowledge and 
action in combination. Further, Knowledge which 
has Liberation as its result can have no dependence 
on the assistance of action, because, being the 
remover of ignorance, it is opposed (to action). 
Verily, darkness cannot be the dispeller of 
darkness. Therefore Knowledge alone is the means 
to the highest good. Objection: Not so, because 
from non-performance of nityakarmas one incurs 
sin. Besides, freedom (of the Self) is eternal. As for 
the view that Liberation is attainable through 
Knowledge alone, it is wrong. For, if nityakarmas 
[As also the occasional duties (naimittika-karmas).] 
which are prescribed by the Vedas are not 
performed, then one will incur evil in the form of 
going to hell etc. Counter-objection: If this be so, 
then, since Liberation cannot come from action, 
will there not arise the contingency of there being 
no Liberation at all? Pseudo-Vedantin: Not so, for 
Liberation is eternal. as a result of performing 
nityakarmas there will not be incurring of evil, and 
as a result of not doing any prohibited action 
(nisiddha-karma) there will not be any possibility 
of birth in an undesirable body; from relinquishing 
actions meant for desired results (kamya-karmas) 
there will be no possibility of being born in some 
desirable body. Since there is no cause to produce 
another body when the present body falls after the 
results of actions that produced this body get 
exhausted by experiencing them, and since one 
does not have attachment etc., therefore Liberation 
consists in the mere continuance of the Self in Its 
own natural state. Thus, Liberation is attained 
without effort. Objection: May it not be argued 
that, since in the case of actions done in many past 
lives-which are calculated to yield such results as 
attainment of heaven, hell, etc. but have not 
commenced bearing results-there is no possiblity of 
their being experienced, therefore they cannot be 
exhausted? Pseudo-Vedantin: No, since the 
suffering of pain from the effort involved in the 
nityakarmas can reasonably be (considered to be) 
the experiencing of their [i.e. of actions done in 
past lives, which have not commenced bearing 
their fruits.-Tr.] results. Or, since the nityakarmas, 
like expiations, may be considered as being meant 
for eliminating the sins incurred earlier, and since 
actions that have begun bearing their fruits get 
exhausted merely through their being experienced, 
therefore Liberation is attained without effort provided no fresh actions are performed. Vedantin: 
No, since there is the Upanisadic text, 'Knowing 
Him alone, one goes beyond death; there is no 
other way to go by' (Sv. 3.8), which states that for 
Liberation there is no other path but 
enlightenment; also because there is the 
Upanisadic statement that Liberation for an 
unenlightened person is as impossible as the 
rolling up of the sky like leather (Sv. 6.20); and 
since it is mentioned in the Puranas and the Smrtis 
that Liberation follows only from Knowledge. 
(From your view) it also follows that there is no 
possibility of the exhaustion of the results of 
virtuous deeds which have not as yet begun 
yielding their fruits. And, as there is the possibility 
of the persistence of sins which were incurred in 
the past but have not yet commenced yielding 
results, similarly there can be the possibility of the 
persistence of virtues which have not yet begun 
bearing fruits. And so, if there be no scope of their 
being exhausted without creating another body, 
then there is no possibility of Liberation. And since 
attachment, hatred and delusion, which are the 
causes of virtue and vice, cannot be eradicated 
through any means other than Knowledge, 
therefore the eradication of virtue and vice 
becomes impossible. Besides, since the Sruti [See 
Ch. .2.23.1 and Br. 1.5.16-Tr.] mentions that 
nityakarmas have heaven as their result, and there 
is the Smrti text, 'Persons belonging to castes and 
stages of life, and engaged in their own duties' 
['...attain to a high, immeasurable happiness.'-Tr.] 
(Ap. Dh. Su. 2.2.2.3), etc., therefore the exhaustion 
of (the fruits of) actions (through nityakarmas) is 
not possible. As for those who say, 'The 
nityakarmas, being painful in themselves, must 
surely be the result of evil deeds done in the past; 
but apart from being what they are, they have no 
other result because this is not mentioned in the 
Vedas and they are enjoined on the basis of the 
mere fact that one is alive'-(this is) not so, because 
actions which have not become operative cannot 
yield any result. Besides, there is no ground for 
experiencing a particular consequence in the form 
of pain [Pain involved in the performance of 
nityakarmas.] The statement, that the pain one 
suffers from the effort involved in performing the 
nityakarmas is the result of sinful acts done in past 
lives, is false. Indeed, it does not stand to reason 
that the result of any action which did not become 
operative at the time of death to yield its fruit is 
experienced in a life produced by some other 
actions. Otherwise, there will be no reason why the 
fruit of some action that is to lead to hell should 
not be experienced in a life that is produced by 
such actions as Agnihotra etc. and is meant for 
enjoying the result in the form of heaven! Besides, 
that (pain arising from the effort in performing 
nityakarmas) cannot be the same as the 
consequence in the form of the particular suffering 
arising from sin. Since there can be numerous 
kinds of sins with results productive of various 
kinds of sorrows, therefore, if it be imagined that 
their (sins') result will be merely in the form of pain 
arising from the effort in undertaking the 
nityakarmas, then it will certainly not be possible 
to suppose that they (the sins incurred in the past) 
are the causes of such obstacles as the pairs of 
opposites (heat and cold, etc.), disease etc., and that 
the result of sins incurred in the past will be only 
the pain arising from the exertion in performing 
nityakarmas, but not the sufferings like carrying 
stones on the head etc. Further, it is out of context 
to say this, that the pain resulting from the effort in 
performing nityakarmas is the result of sinful acts 
done in the past. Objection: How? Vedantin: What 
is under discussion is that the sin committed in the 
past, which has not begun to bear fruit, cannot be 
dissipated. In that context you say that pain
resulting from the effort in undertaking 
nityakarmas is the result of action which has begun 
bearing fruit, not of that which has not yet 
commenced yielding fruit! On the other hand, if 
you think that all sins committed in the past have 
begun yielding their results, then it is unreasonable 
to specify that the pain resulting from the exertion 
in performing the nitya-karmas is their only result. 
And there arises the contingency of the injunction 
to perform nityakarmas becoming void, because 
the sinful deed which has begun bearing fruit can 
ligically be dissipated only be experiencing its 
result. Further, if pain be the result of nityakarmas 
enjoined by the Vedas, then it is seen to arise from 
the very effort in undertaking nityakarmas-as in 
the case of excercise etc. To imagine that it is the 
result of something else is illogical. [The pain 
arising from bodily excercise is the result of the 
excercise itself, and not the result of any past sin! 
Similarly, the pain resulting from undertaking 
nityakarmas is the consequence of that 
performance itself, and need not be imagined to be 
the result of any past sin.] And if the nityakarmas 
have been enjoined simply on the basis of a 
person's being alive, it is unreasonable that it 
should be the result of sins committed in the past, 
any more than expiation is. An expiation that has 
been enjoined following a particular sinful act is 
not the result of that sin! On the other hand, if the 
suffering arising from expiation be the reslut of 
that very sin which is its cause, then the pain from 
the effort in performing nityakarmas, though 
prescribed merely on the fact of one's being alive, 
may become the fruit of that very fact of one's 
being alive-which was itself the occasion (for 
enjoining the nityakarmas)-, because both the 
nityakarmas and expiatory duties are 
indistinguishable so far as their being occasioned 
by something is concerned. Moreover, there is the 
other fact: There can be no such distinction that 
only the pain resulting from the performance of 
nityakarmas is the result of past sinful deeds, but 
not so the pain from performing kamya-karmas 
(rites and duties undertaken for desired results), 
because the pain in performing Agnihotra-sacrifice 
etc. is the same when it is performed as a 
nityakarma or as a kamya-karma. Thus the latter 
also may be the result of past sinful acts. This being 
the case, it is untenable to assume on the ground of 
circumstantial inference that, since no result is 
enjoined in the Vedas for nityakarmas and since its 
prescription cannot be justified on any other 
ground, therefore pain from the effort in 
performing nityakarmas is the result of sinful past 
deeds. Thus, the (Vedic) injunction being 
unjustifiable otherwise, it can be inferred that 
nityakarmas have got some result other than the 
pain arising from the effort in undertaking them. It 
also involves this contradiction: It is contradictory 
to say that through the performance of nityakarma 
a result of some other action is experienced. And 
when this is admitted, it is again a contradiction to 
say that that very experience is the result of the 
nityakarma, and yet that niyakarma has no result! 
Moreover, when Agnihotra and other sacrifices are 
performed for desirable results (Kamya Agnihotra), then the Agnihotra etc. which are 
performed as nityakarma (Nitya-Agnihotra) 
become accomplished simultaneously (on a 
account of its being a part ofthe former). Hence, 
since the Kamya-Agnihotra (as an act) is 
dependent on and not different from the Nitya Agnihotra, therefore the result of the Agnihotra 
and other sacrifices performed with a desire for 
results will get exhausted through the suffering 
involved in the exertion in undertaking it (the 
Nitya-Agnihotra). On the other hand, if the result 
of Kamya-Agnihotra etc. be different, viz heaven 
etc., then even the suffering arising from the 
exertion in performing them ought to be 
necessarily different (from the suffering involved 
in the Nitya-Agnihotra). And that is not the fact, 
because it contradicts what is directly perceived; 
for the pain resulting from the effort in performing 
only the Nitya-(-Agnihotra) does not differ from 
the pain resulting from the exertion in undertaking 
the Kamya (-Agnihotra). Besides, there is this other 
consideration: Actions which have not been 
enjoined or prohibited (by the scriptures) produce 
immediate results. But those enjoined or prohibited 
by the scriptures do not produce immediate 
results; were they to do so, then there would be no 
effort even with regard to heaven etc. and 
injunctions concerning unseen results. And it 
cannot be imagined that only the fruit of (Nitya-) 
Agnihotra etc. gets exhausted through the 
suffering arising from the effort in performing 
them, but the Kamya (-Agnihotra) has exalted 
results like heaven etc. merely as a consequence of 
the fact of desire for results, though as acts there is 
no essential difference between them (the Nitya 
and the Kamya) and there is no additional 
subsidiary part, processes of performance, etc. (in 
the kamya-Agnihotra). Therefore, it can never be 
established that nitya-karmas have no unseen
results. And hence, enlightenment alone, not the 
performance of nityakarmas, is the cuase of the 
total dissipation of actions done through 
ignorance, be they good or bad. For, all actions 
have for their origin ignorance and desire. Thus 
has it been established (in the following passages) 
that action (rites and duties) is meant for the 
ignorant, and steadfastness in Knowledge-after 
renunciation of all actions-is meant for the 
enlightened: 'both of them do not know' (2.19); 'he 
who knows this One as indestructible, eternal' 
(2.21); 'through the Yoga of Knowledge for the men 
of realization; through the Yoga of Action for the 
yogis' (3.3); 'the ignorant, who are attached to 
work' (3.26); 'But...the one who is a knower...does 
not become attached, thinking thus: "The organs 
rest on the objects of the organs"' (3.28); 'The 
embodied man...having given up all actions 
mentally, continues' (5.13); 'Remaining absorbed in 
the Self, the knower of Reality should think, "I 
certainly do not do anything"' (5.8); i.e; the 
unenlightened person thinks, 'I do'; 'For (the sage) 
who wishes to ascend (to Dhyana-yoga), action is 
said to be the means...when he has ascended (when 
he is established in the Yoga of Meditation), 
inaction alone is said to be the means' (6.3); 'noble 
indeed' are all the three (classes of) unenlightened 
persons, 'but the man of Knowledge is the very 
Self. (This is) My opinion' (7.18); the unenlightened 
who perform their rites and duties, 'who are 
desirous of pleasures, attain the state of going and 
returning' (9.21); 'becoming non-different from Me 
and meditative' (9.22) and endowed with steadfast 
devotion, they worship (Me) the Self which has 
been described as comparable to space and 
taintless; and 'I grant that possession of wisdom by 
which they reach Me' (10.10); i.e., the 
unenlightened persons who perform rites and 
duties 'do not reach Me.' Those who perform 
works for the Lord and who, though they be the 
most devout, are ignorant persons performing rites 
and duties,-they remain involved in practices 
which, in a descending order, culminate in giving 
up the fruit of actions (cf. 12.6-11). But those who 
meditate on the indefinable Immutable take 
recourse to the disciplines stated in the passages 
beginning with 'He who is not hateful towards any 
creature' (12.13) and ending with that Chapter, and 
also resort to the path of Knowledge presented in 
the three chapters beginning with the Chapter on 
the 'field'. The three results of actions, viz the 
undesirable etc. (cf. 12), do not accrue only to the 
mendicants belonging to the Order of 
Paramahamsas (the highest Order of monks)-who 
have renounced all actions that originate from the 
five causes beginning with the locus (cf. 14), who 
possess the knowledge of the oneness and non agentship of the Self (17,20), who continue in the 
supreme steadfastness in Knowledge, who know 
the real nature of the Lord, and who have taken 
refuge in the unity of the real nature of the Lord 
with the Self. It does accrue to the others who are 
not monks, the ignorant persons who perform rites 
and duties. Such is this distinction made in the 
scripture Gita with regard to what is duty and 
what is not. Objection: May it not be argued that it 
cannot be proved that all actions are due to 
ignorance? Reply: No, (it can be proved,) as in the 
case of slaying a Brahmin. Although the 
nityakarmas are known from the scriptures, still 
they are meant only for the ignorant. As such an 
action as killing a Brahmin, even though known to 
be a source of evil from the scripture prohibiting it, 
is still perpetrated by one who has defects such as 
ignorance, passion, etc.-because impulsion to any 
action is otherwise not possible-, so also is it with 
regard to the nitya, naimittika and kamya actions. 
Objection: May it not be held that impulsion to 
nityakarma etc. is not possible if the Self be not 
known as a distinct entity? [Unless one knows the 
Self to be distinct from the body etc. he will not 
perform the nityakarmas etc. meant for results in 
the other worlds, viz heaven etc. (Tr.:) In place of 
vyatiriktatmani, Ast. reads 'deha-vyatiriktatmani, 
the Self which is distinct from the body'.] Reply: 
No, since it is seen that with regard to actions 
which are of the nature of motion and are 
accomplished by the not-Self, one engages in them 
with the idea, 'I do.' [The actionless Self is not the 
agent of the movements of the body etc. Still 
agentship is superimposed on It through 
ignorance.] Objection: Can it not be said that the 
notion of egoism with regard to the aggregate of 
body etc. occurs in a figurative sense; it is not false? 
Reply: No, since its effects [i.e. the effects of the 
notion of egoism.] also will become figurative. 
Objection: The notion of 'I' with regard to the 
aggregate of one's own body etc. occurs in a 
figurative sense. As with regard to one's own son it 
is said (in the Veda), 'It is you yourself who is 
called the son' (Sa. Br. 14.9.4.26), and in common 
parlance also it is said, 'This cow is my very life', so 
is the case here. [As the use of the word 'I' with 
regard to a son is figurative, so also with regard to 
the body.] This is certainly not a false notion. 
However, a false notion (of identity) occurs in the 
case of a stump and a man, when the distinction 
between them is not evident (due to darkness). 
Reply: A figuratively expressed notion cannot lead 
to an effect in the real sense, because that (notion) 
is used for the eulogy of its basis with the help of a 
word of comparison which remains understood. 
As for instance, such sentences as, 'Devadatta is a 
lion', 'The boy is a fire'-implying 'like a lion', 'like a 
fire', on the basis of the similarity of cruelty, the 
tawny colour, etc.-are meant only for eulogizing 
Devadatta and the boy who are the basis (i.e. the 
subjects of the two sentences). But no action of a 
lion or a fire is accomplished because of the use of 
the figurative words or ideas. On the contrary, one 
experiences the evil effects of false notions. 
[Therefore the idea of 'I' with regard to one's body 
etc. does not occur in a secondary sense, but it does 
so falsely.] And with regard to the subjects of the 
figurative notions, one understands, 'This 
Devadatta cannot be a lion; this boy cannot be a 
fire.' Similarly, actions done by the aggregate of 
body etc., which is the 'Self' in a figurative sense, 
cannot be held to have been done by the Self which 
is the real subject of the notion of 'I'. For, actions 
done by the figurative lion or fire cannot be 
considered to have been accomplished by the real 
lion or fire. Nor is any action of the real lion and 
fire accomplished through the (figurative) cruelty 
or tawnyaness; for, their purpose is fully served by 
being used for eulogy. And those who are praised 
know, 'I am not a lion; I am not fire; and neither is 
the work of a lion or fire mine.' So the more ligical 
notion is, 'The action of the aggregate (of body etc.)
do not belong to me who am the real Self', and not, 
'I am the agent; it is my work.' As for the assertion 
made by some that the Self acts through Its own 
memory, deisre and effort, which are the causes of 
activity-that is not so, for they are based on false 
knowledge. Memory, desire, effort, etc. indeed 
follow from the tendencies born from the 
experience of the desirable and the undesirable 
results of actions (-which actions themselves arise 
from the notions of the 'desirable' and the 
'undesirable') caused by false knowledge. [False 
knowledge gives rise to the ideas of the desirable 
and the undesirable. From these arise desire and 
repulsion. Actions which follow give rise to the 
experience of their desirable and undesirable 
results. Such experiences create impressions in the 
mind, from which are born memory etc.] Just as in 
this life virtue, vice and the experience of their 
results are cuased by the identification (of the Self) 
with the aggregate of body etc. and attraction, 
repulsion, etc., so also was it in the previous birth, 
and even in the life preceding that. Thus it can be 
inferred that past and future mundane existence is 
without beginning and is a product of ignorance. 
And from this it becomes proved that the absolute 
cessation of mundane existence is caused by 
steadfastness in Knowledge, accompanied by 
renunciation of all rites and duties. Besides, since 
self-identification with the body is nothing but 
ignorance, therefore, when the (ignorance) ceases, 
there remains so possibility of re-birth, and so, 
mundane existence becomes impossible. The 
identification of the Self with the aggregate of body 
etc. is nothing but ignorance, because in common 
life it is not seen that anybody who knows, 'I am 
different from cattle etc., and the cattle etc. are 
different from me', entertains the notion of 'I' with 
regard to them. However, mistaken perceiving a 
stump to be a man, one may out of 
indiscrimination entertain the idea of 'I' with 
regard to the aggregate of body etc.; not so when 
perceiving them as distinct. As for that notion of 
considering the son to be oneself-as mentioned in, 
'It is you yourself who is called the son' (Sa. Br.14.9.4.26)-, 
that is a metaphor based on the 
relationship between the begotten and the begetter. 
And no real action like eating etc.can be 
accomplished through something considered 
metaphorically as the Self, just as actions of the real 
lion or fire (cannot be accomplished) by someone 
metaphorically thought of to be a lion or fire. 
Objection: Since an injunction relating to an unseen 
result is valid, therefore, may it not be said that the 
purposes of the Self are accomplished by the body 
and organs which are figuratively considered to be 
the Self? Reply: No, since the thinking of them as 
the Self is the result of ignorance. The body, 
organs, etc. are not the Self in a figurative sense. 
Objection: How then? Reply: Although the Self is 
devoid of relationship, still, by an ascription of 
relationship (to the Self), they (body etc.) come to 
be regarded as the Self, verily through a false 
notion. For, this identification (of body etc.) with 
the Self exists so long as the false notion is there, 
and ceases to exist when it is not there. So long as 
ignorance lasts, identification of the Self with the 
aggregate of body and organs is seen only in the 
case of non-discriminating, immature, ignorant 
poeple who say, 'I am tall', 'I am fair'. But in the 
case of discriminating persons who possess the 
knowledge, 'I am different from the aggregate of 
body etc.', there does not arise the idea of egoism 
with regard to the body etc. at that time (i.e. 
simultaneously with that knowledge). Hence, since 
it (i.e. identification of the Self with the body etc.) 
ceases in the absence of the false notion, therefore it 
is a creation of that (false notion), and not a 
figurative notion. It is only when the common and 
the uncommon features of the lion and Devadatta, 
or of fire and the boy, are known distinctly, that a 
figurative notion or verbal expression can occur; 
not when the common and the uncommon features 
are unknown. As for the argument that (the 
figurative notion should be accepted) on the 
authority of the Vedas, we say, 'No', because their 
validity concerns unseen results. The validity of 
the Vedas holds good only with regard to matters 
concerning the relation between ends and means of 
Agnihotra etc., which are not known through such 
valid means of knowledge as direct perception; but 
not with regard to objects of direct perception etc., 
because the validity of the Vedas lies in revealing 
what is beyond direct perception. Therefore it is 
not possible to imagine that the idea of egism with 
regard to the aggregate of body etc., arising from 
an obviously of false knowledge, is a figurative 
notion. Surely, even a hundred Vedic texts cannot 
become valid if they assert that fire is cold or non luminous! Should a Vedic text say that fire is cold 
or non-luminous, even then one has to assume that 
the intended meaning of the text is different, for 
otherwise (its) validity cannot be maintained; but 
one should not assume its meaning in a way that 
might contradict some other valid means of 
knowledge or contradict its own statement. 
Objection: May it not be said that since actions are 
undertaken by one possessed of a false idea of 
agentship, therefore, when the agent ceases to be 
so ['According to you (the Vedantin), an ignorant 
man alone can be an agent. Therefore, when he 
becomes illumined, he will cease to be ignorant 
and consequently the Vedas will cease to be valid 
for him.'] the Vedas will become invalid? Reply: 
No, since the Vedas become logically meaningful 
in respect of knowledge of Brahman. [Though the 
Vedic injunctions about rituals etc. be inapplicable 
in the case of an enlightened person, still they have 
empirical validity before enlightenment. Besides, 
the Vedas have real validity with regard to the 
knowledge of Brahman.] Objection: May it not be 
said that there arises the contingency of the Vedic 
texts enjoining knowledge of Brahman becoming 
as invalid as those texts enjoining rites and duties? 
Reply: No, since there cannot possibly be any 
notion which can remove (the knowledge of 
Brahman). Unlike the manner in which the idea of 
egoism with regard to the aggregate of body etc. is 
removed after the realization of the Self from 
hearing the Vedic injunctions regarding the 
knowledge of Brahman, the realization of the Self 
in the Self can never be removed in any way in that 
manner by anything whatsoever-just as the 
knowledge that fire is hot and luminous is 
irremovable-, since (Self-) realization is inseparable 
from its result (i.e. cessation of ignorance). Besides, 
the Vedic texts enjoining rites (and duties) etc. are 
not invalid, because they, through the generation 
of successively newer tendencies by eliminating 
the successively preceding tendencies, are meant 
for creating the tendency to turn towards the 
indwelling Self. [The Vedic injunctions make 
people up rituals etc. by giving up their earlier 
worldly tendencies. Thereby their minds become 
purified. The purified mind then aspires to know 
the indwelling Self. Thus, since the ritualistic 
injunctions are meant for making a person turn 
towards the knowledge ofthe indwelling Self, they 
are not invalid.] Although the means be unreal (in 
itself), still it may be meaningful in relation to the 
truth of the purpose it serves, as are the eulogistic 
sentences (arthavada) [See note on p. 40.-Tr.] 
occuring along with injunctions. Even in the world, 
when it becomes necessary to make to child or a 
lunatic drink milk etc. it is said that it will help 
growth of hair [Cuda, lit. hair on the top of the 
head; or single lock of hair left on the crown of the 
head after tonsure. See V.S.A.] etc.! Before the 
dawn of Knowledge, the (ritualistic) Vedic texts 
concerned with a different situation [The situation 
obtaining before the dawn of Self-knowledge.] are 
also as valid in themselves as are direct perception 
etc. occuring due to Self-identification with the 
body etc. On the other hand, as for your view 'The 
Self, though inactive by Itself, acts through Its mere 
proximity; and that itself constitutes agentship of 
the Self in the primary sense. Just as it is well 
known that a king, though not himself engaged in 
a battle, is, merely by virtue of his being in charge, 
said to be fighting when his soldiers are fighting, 
and that he is victorious or defeated; similarly, as 
the commander of an army acts through his mere 
orders, and it is seen that the results of the actions 
accrue to the king or to the commander; or, just as 
the actions of the priests are ascribed to the 
sacrificer,-in that very manner are the actions done 
by the body etc. ought to be of the Self because the 
result of those actions accrues to the Self. And, as 
the agentship of a magnet which, in fact, is not 
active, is attributed to it in the primary sense 
because it causes a piece of iron to move, similar is 
the agentship of the Self'-that is wrong, since it will 
amunt to an inactive entity becoming an agent. 
Objection: May not agentship be of various kinds? 
Reply: No, for in the case of the 'king' and others it 
is seen that they have agentship even in the 
primary sense. As for the king, he fights even 
through his personal engagement. And he has 
agentship in the primary sense by virtue of making 
(his) warriors fight, distributing wealth, and also 
reaping the fruits of victory or defeat. Similarly, the 
agentship of a sacrificer is primary by virtue of his 
offering the main oblation and giving gifts due to 
the priests. Therefore it is understood that the 
agentship which is attributed to an inactive entity 
is figurative. If primary agentship consisting in 
their personal engagement is not perceived in the 
case of the king, a sacrificer and others, then it 
could be assumed that they have primary 
agentship owing to the mere fact of their presence, 
just as a magnet has by virtue of making the iron 
move. But in the case of the king and others it is 
not perceived that they have no personal 
engagement in that way. Therefore, even the 
agentship owing to mere presence is a figurative 
one. And if that be so, the connection with the 
result of such agentship will also be figurative. No 
action in the primary sense is performed by an 
agent figuratively thought to be so. Hence the 
assertion is certainly wrong that owing to the 
activities of the body etc. the actionless Self 
becomes an agent and experiencer. But everything 
becomes possible due to error. This is just as it 
happens in dream or in jugglery! Besides, in deep 
sleep, absorption in Brahman, etc. where the 
current of the mistaken idea of Self-identity with 
the body etc. ceases, evils like agentship, 
enjoyership, etc. are not perceived. Therefore this 
delusion of mundane existence is surely due to 
false knowledge; but it is not reality. Consequently, 
it is established that it ceases absolutely as a result 
of full enlightenment. Having summed up in this 
chapter the import of the whole of the scripture 
Gita, and having again summarized it specially 
here at the end (in verse 66) for the sake of 
emphasizing the purport of the Scripture, now 
after that, the Lord states the rules for handing 
down the Scripture: 
18.67 This (that I have taught) you should not ever 
be taught to one who is devoid of austerities and to 
one who is not a devotee; also, neither to one who 
does not render service, nor as well to one who 
cavils at Me. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.67 Idam, this Scripture; which has been taught 
by Me te, to you, for your good, for terminating 
mundane existence; an vacyam, should not be 
taught (-na is connected with the remote word 
vacyam-); atapaskaya, to one who is devoid of 
austerities. It should kadacana, never, under any 
condition whatsoever; be taught abhaktaya, to one 
who is not a devotee, who is devoid of devotion to 
his teacher and God, even if he be a man of 
austerity. Neither should it be taught even 
asurusave, to one who does not redner service even though he may be a devotee and a man of 
austerity. Na ca, nor as well; to him yah, who; 
abhyasuyati, cavils; mam, at Me, at Vasudeva thinking that I am an ordinary person; to him who, 
not knowing My Godhood, imputes self-adulation 
etc. to Me and cannot tolerate Me. He too is unfit; 
to him also it should not be imparted. From the 
force of the context it is understood that the 
Scripture should be taught to one who has 
devotion to the Lord, is austere, renders service, 
and does not cavil. As to that, since it is seen (in a 
Smrti)-'to one who is intelligent or to one who is 
austere'-that there is an option between the two, it 
follows that this should be imparted either to an 
austere person given to service and devotion, or to 
an intelligent person endowed with them. It should 
not be imparted to an austere or even an intelligent 
person if he lacks service and devotion. It should 
not be taught to one who cavils at the Lord, even 
though he be possessed of all the good qualities. 
And it should be taught to one whoserves his 
teacher and is devout. This is the rule for 
transmitting the Scripture. Now the Lord states the 
fruit derived by one who transmits the Scripture: 
18.68 He who, entertaining supreme devotion to 
Me, will speak of this highest secret, to My 
devotees will without doubt reach Me alone. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.68 Yah, he who; abhi-dhasyati, will speak of, i.e., 
will present with the help of the text and its 
meaning, as I have done to you; imam, this; 
paramam, highest-that which has Liberation as its 
purpose; guhyam, secret, as spoken of above-(i.e.) 
the text in the form of a conversation between 
Kesava and Arjuna; madbhaktesu, to My devotees-
. How will present? This is being stated: Krtva, 
entertaining; param, supreme; bhaktim, devotion; 
mayi, to Me, i.e., entertainting an idea thus-'A 
service is being rendered by me to the Lord who is 
the supreme Teacher'-. Tho him comes this result: 
esyati, he will reach; mam, Me; eva, alone. He is 
certainly freed. No doubt should be entertained in 
this regard. By the repetition of (the word) bhakti 
(devotion) [In the word madbhaktesu.], it is 
understood that one becomes fit for being taught 
(this) Scripture by virtue of devotion alone to Him. 
Besides, 
18.69 And as compared with him, none else among 
human beings is the best accomplisher of what is 
dear to Me. Moreover, nor will there be anyone 
else in the world dearer to Me than he. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.69 Ca, and; tasmat, as compared with him, with 
the one who hands down the Scripture; na kascit, 
none else; manusyesu, among human beings; is 
priya-krt-tamah, the best accomplisher of what is 
dear; me, to Me, i.e., among the present human 
beings, surely none else other than him exists who 
is a better accomplisher of what I cherish. 
Moreover, na bhavita, nor will there be in future; 
anyah, anyone else, a second person; bhuvi, in he 
world, here; priyatarah, dearer; tasmat, than him. 
[It may be argued that, since for a seeker of 
Liberation meditation is the best means for It, 
therefore he will have no inclination to transmit 
scriptural teachings. To this the Lord's answer is: 
One longing for Liberation has a duty to impart 
this scriptural teaching to one possessing the 
aforesaid qualities.] 
18.70 And he who will study this sacred 
conversation between us two, which is conducive 
to virtue, by him I shall be adored through the 
Sacrifice in the form of Knowledge. This is My 
judgement. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.70 Ca, and; even he yah, who; adhyesyate, will 
study; imam, this; samvadam, conversation, the 
text in the form of a dialogue; between avayoh, us 
two; which is dharmyam, conducive to virtue, not 
divorced from virtue; tena, by him; this will be 
accomplished through that study; aham, I; syam, 
shall be; istah, adored; jnana-yajnena, through the 
Sacrifice in the form of Knowledge. Iti, this is me, 
My; matih, judgement. As compared with the 
various sacrifices, viz rituals, loud prayer, prayer 
uttered in a low voice and mental prayer, the 
Sacrifice in the from of Knowledge is the best [See 4.33.] 
because it is mental. Hence, the study of the 
scripture Gita is praised as that Sacrifice in the 
form of Knowledge. Or, this (verse) may merely be 
a judgement about the result. The idea is that the 
result of the study is comparable to the result of the 
Sacrifice in the form of the knowledge of gods and 
others. Now, this is the reward for the hearer: 
18.71 Any man who, being reverential and free 
from cavilling, might even hear (this), he too, 
becoming free, shall attain the blessed worlds of 
those who perform virtuous deeds. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.71 Yah narah, any man who; being sraddhavan, 
reverential; and anasuyah, free from cavilling; 
srnuyat api, might even hear this text-the word 
even suggests that one who knows the meaning (of 
the Scripture) hardly needs to be mentioned-; sah 
api, he too; becoming muktah, free from sin; 
prapnuyat, shall attain; subhan, the blessed, 
auspicious; lokan, worlds; punya-karmanam, of 
those who perform virtuous deeds, of those who 
perform rites like Agnihotra etc. In order to 
ascertaini whether or not the disciple has 
comprehended the meaning of the Scripture, the 
Lord asks (the following question), the intention of 
the questioner beings, 'If it is known that it has not 
been comprehended, I shall again make him grasp 
it through other means.' Hereby is shown the duty 
of the teacher that a student should be made to 
achieve his goal by taking the help of a different 
method. 
18.72 O Partha, has this been listened to by you 
with a one-pointed mind? O Dhananjaya, has your 
delusion caused by ignorance been destroyed? 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.72 O Partha, kaccit etat, has this that has been 
said by Me; been srutam, listened to, grasped 
through hearing; ekagrena, with a none-pointed; 
cetasa, mind? Or have you been inattentive? O 
Dhananjaya, kaccit, has; te, your; ajnanasammohah, delusion caused by ignorance, 
bewilderment, natural indiscrimination; been 
pranastah, destroyed, for which purpose has there 
been this effort on your part for hearing the 
Scripture, and on My part, the effort of being a 
teacher? 
18.73 Arjuna said -- O Acyuta, (my) delusion has 
been destroyed and memory has been regained by 
me through Your grace. I stand with my doubt 
removed; I shall follow Your instruction. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.73 O Acyuta, (my) mohah, born of ignorance 
and the cause of all evil in the form of mundane 
existence, and difficult to cross like an ocean;l 
nastah has been destroyed. And smrtih, memory, 
regarding the reality of the Self-on the acquisition 
of which follows the loosening of all the bonds; 
labdha, has been regained, tvat-prasadat, through 
Your grace maya, by me, who am dependent on 
Your grace. By this question about the destruction 
of delusion and the answer to it, it becomes 
conclusively revealed that the fruit derived from 
understanding the import of the entire Scripture is 
this much alone-which is the destruction of 
delusion arising from ignorance and the regaining 
of the memory about the Self. And similarly, in the 
Upanisadic text beginning with 'I grieve because I 
am not a knower of the Self' (Ch. 7.1.3), it is shown 
that all bonds become destroyed when the Self is 
realized. There are also the words of the 
Upanisadic verses, 'The knot of the heart gets 
untied' (Mu. 2.2.8); 'at that time (or to that Self) 
what delusion and what sorrow can there be for 
that seer of oneness?' (Is.7). Now then, sthitah, 
asmi, I stand under Your command; gatasandehah, with (my) doubts removed. Karisye, I 
shall follow; tava, Your; vacanam, instruction. By 
Your grace I have achieved the goal of life. The 
idea is, there is no duty, as such, for me. The 
teaching of the Scripture is concluded. There-after, 
now in order to show the connection (of this) with 
the (main) narrative-. 
18.74 Sanjaya said -- I thus heard this conversation 
of Vasudeva and of the great-souled Partha, which 
is unique and makes one's hair stand on end. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.74 Aham, I; iti, thus; asrausam, heard; imam, 
this; samvadam, conversation, as has been 
narrated; vasudevasya, of Vasudeva; and 
mahatmanah, parthasya, of the great-soulded 
Partha; which is adbhutam, unique, extremely 
wonderful; and roma-harsanam, makes one's hair 
stand on end. 
18.75 Through the favour of Vyasa I heard this 
secret concerning the supreme Yoga from Krsna, 
the Lord of yogas, while He Himself was actually 
speaking! 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.75 And vyasa-prasadat, through the favour of 
Vyasa, by having received divine vision from him; 
aham, I; srutvan, heard; etat [The Commentator 
uses etam in the masculine gender, in place of etat 
in the text, because it refers to the masculine word 
samvada.] (should rather be etam), this; guhyam, 
secret dialogue, such as it is; concerning the param, 
supreme; Yogam, Yoga-or, this dialogue itself is 
the Yoga because it is meant for it-; krsnat, from 
Krsna; yogeswarat, from the Lord of yogas; 
kathayatah, while He was speaking; svayam, 
Himself; saksat, actually; not indirectly through 
others. 
18.76 And, O king, while repeatedly remembering 
this unique, sacred dialogue between Kesava and 
Arjuna, I rejoice every moment. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.76 And, rajan, O king, Dhrtarastra; after having 
heard, samsmrtya samsmrtya, while repeatedly 
remembering; imam, this; adbhuttam, unique; 
samvadam, dialogue; kesava-arjunayoh, between 
Kesava and Arjuna; which is punyam, sacred, 
removes sin even when heard; hrsyami, I rejoice; 
muhuh, muhuh, every moment. 
18.77 O king, repeatedly recollecting that greatly 
extraordinary form of Hari, I am struck with 
wonder. And I rejoice again and again. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.77 And, rajan, O King; samsmrtya samsmrtya, 
repeatedly recollecting; tat, that; ati-adbhutam, 
greatly extraordinary; rupam, form, the Cosmic 
form; hareh, of Hari; mahan vismayah me, I am 
struck with great wonder. And hrsyami, I rejoice; 
punah punah, again and again. 
18.78 Where there is Krsna, the Lord of yogas, and 
where there is Partha, the wielder of the bow, there 
are fortune, victory, prosperity and unfailing 
prudence. Such is my conviction. 
English Translation of Sri Sankaracharya's Sanskrit 
Commentary - Swami Gambhirananda 
18.78 To be brief, yatra, where, the side on which; 
there is Krsna, yogeswarah, the Lord of yogas-who 
is the Lord of all the yogas and the source of all the 
yogas, since they originate from Him; and yatra, 
where, the side on which; there is Partha, 
dhanurdharah, the wielder of the bow, of the bow 
called Gandiva; tatra, there, on that side of the 
Pandavas; are srih, fortune; vijayah, victory; and 
there itself is bhutih, prosperity, great abundance 
of fortune; and dhruva, unfailing; nitih, prudence. 
Such is me, my ; matih, conviction. 